<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>
                    Reading View for Sherlock
                </title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="mcdonough_11-11-22.css"/>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h1>II. THE RED-HEADED LEAGUETHE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER’S THUMBTHE FIVE ORANGE PIPSTHE MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIPIII. A CASE OF IDENTITYVII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLEI. A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIAXI. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONETVIII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BAND</h1>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I had called</span> upon my
         friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the autumn of last year and found him in deep
         conversation with a very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair.
         With an apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when <span class="sw-action">Holmes pulled me abruptly</span>
         into the room and closed the door behind me.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You could not possibly have come at a better time, my
            dear Watson,</q> he said cordially.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I was afraid that you were engaged.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">So I am. Very much so.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Then I can wait in the next room.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my
            partner and helper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he
            will be of the utmost use to me in yours also.</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="jabezWilson">The stout gentleman half rose from
            his chair and gave a bob of greeting</span>, with a quick little questioning
         glance from his small fat-encircled eyes.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Try the settee,</q> said <span class="sw-action">Holmes, relapsing into his armchair and putting his
            fingertips together</span>, as was his custom when in judicial moods. <q class="sw-quote">I know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that
            is bizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum routine of everyday life. You
            have shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you to chronicle,
            and, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellish so many of my own little
            adventures.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to
            me,</q> I observed.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You will remember that I remarked the other day, just
            before we went into the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, that
            for strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to life itself, which
            is always far more daring than any effort of the imagination.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">A proposition which I took the liberty of
            doubting.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to
            my view, for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until your
            reason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Now, <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good
               enough to call upon me</span> this morning, and to begin a narrative which
            promises to be one of the most singular which I have listened to for some time. You
            have heard me remark that the strangest and most unique things are very often
            connected not with the larger but with the smaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed,
            where there is room for doubt whether any positive crime has been committed. As far
            as I have heard, it is impossible for me to say whether the present case is an
            instance of crime or not, but the course of events is certainly among the most
            singular that I have ever listened to. Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great
            kindness to recommence your narrative. I ask you not merely because my friend Dr.
            Watson has not heard the opening part but also because the peculiar nature of the
            story makes me anxious to have every possible detail from your lips. As a rule, when
            I have heard some slight indication of the course of events, I am able to guide
            myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur to my memory. In the
            present instance I am forced to admit that the facts are, to the best of my belief,
            unique.</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="jabezWilson">The portly client puffed out his
            chest with an appearance of some little pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled
            newspaper from the inside pocket of his greatcoat</span>. As he glanced down the
         advertisement column, with his head thrust forward and the paper flattened out upon
         his
         knee, <span class="sw-action">I took a good look</span>
         at the man and endeavoured, after the fashion of my companion, to read the indications
         which might be presented by his dress or appearance.</p>
      <p>I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor bore every mark of
         being
         an average commonplace British tradesman, obese, pompous, and slow. He wore rather
         baggy
         grey shepherd's check trousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the
         front, and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square pierced
         bit
         of metal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown overcoat
         with
         a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him. Altogether, look as I would,
         there
         was nothing remarkable about the man save his blazing red head, and the expression
         of
         extreme chagrin and discontent upon his features.</p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes' quick eye took
            in my occupation</span>, and <span class="sw-action">he shook his head</span> with a smile as he noticed my questioning
         glances. <q class="sw-quote">Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some
            time done manual labour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has
            been in China, and that he has done a considerable amount of writing lately, I can
            deduce nothing else.</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="jabezWilson">Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his
            chair</span>, with his forefinger upon the paper, but his eyes upon my
         companion.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr.
            Holmes?</q> he asked. <q class="male-quote">How did you know, for
            example, that I did manual labour. It's as true as gospel, for I began as a ship's
            carpenter.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size
            larger than your left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more
            developed.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I won't insult your intelligence by telling you how I
            read that, especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you use an
            arc-and-compass breastpin.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very
            shiny for five inches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the elbow where
            you rest it upon the desk?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, but China?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your
            right wrist could only have been done in China. I have made a small study of tattoo
            marks and have even contributed to the literature of the subject. That trick of
            staining the fishes' scales of a delicate pink is quite peculiar to China. When, in
            addition, I see a Chinese coin hanging from your watch-chain, the matter becomes
            even more simple.</q></p>
      <p>Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. <q class="male-quote">Well, I never!</q>
         said he. <q class="male-quote">I thought at first that you had done something
            clever, but I see that there was nothing in it after all.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I begin to think, Watson,</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">that I make a mistake in explaining. '_Omne ignotum pro
            magnifico_,' you know, and my poor little reputation, such as it is, will suffer
            shipwreck if I am so candid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr.
            Wilson?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes, I have got it now,</q> he answered with his thick
         red finger planted halfway down the column. <q class="male-quote">Here it is.
            This is what began it all. You just read it for yourself, sir.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I took the paper from him and
            read</span> as follows:</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of the bequest of
            the late Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., there is now another
            vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to a salary of £ 4 a week for
            purely nominal services. All red-headed men who are sound in body and mind and above
            the age of twenty-one years, are eligible. Apply in person on Monday, at eleven
            o'clock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices of the League, 7 Pope's Court, Fleet
            Street.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What on earth does this mean?</q> I ejaculated after I
         had twice read over the extraordinary announcement.</p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Holmes chuckled and wriggled in
            his chair</span>, as was his habit when in high spirits. <q class="sw-quote">It is a little off the beaten track, isn't it?</q> said
         he. <q class="sw-quote">And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell
            us all about yourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement had
            upon your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of the paper and the
            date.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is _The Morning Chronicle_ of April 27, 1890. Just two
            months ago.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock
            Holmes,</q> said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; <q class="male-quote">I have a small pawnbroker's business at Coburg Square, near
            the City. It's not a very large affair, and of late years it has not done more than
            just give me a living. I used to be able to keep two assistants, but now
            <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I only keep
               one</span>; and I would have a job to pay him but that he is willing to come
            for half wages so as to learn the business.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What is the name of this obliging youth?</q> asked
         Sherlock Holmes.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he's not such a youth,
            either. It's hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes;
            and I know very well that he could better himself and earn twice what I am able to
            give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied, why should I put ideas in his
            head?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an
            _employé_ who comes under the full market price. It is not a common experience among
            employers in this age. I don't know that your assistant is not as remarkable as your
            advertisement.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Oh, he has his faults, too,</q> said Mr. Wilson. <q class="male-quote">Never was such a fellow for photography. Snapping away with a
            camera when he ought to be improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar
            like a rabbit into its hole to develop his pictures. That is his main fault, but on
            the whole he's a good worker. There's no vice in him.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">He is still with you, I presume?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of
            simple cooking and keeps the place clean—that's all I have in the house, for I am
            a
            widower and never had any family. We live very quietly, sir, the three of us; and
            we
            keep a roof over our heads and pay our debts, if we do nothing more.</q></p>
      <p>The first thing that put us out was that advertisement. <span class="male" title="jabezWilson"> Spaulding, he came down into the office</span> just
         this day eight weeks, with this very paper in his hand, and he says:</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">I wish to the Lord, Mr.
               Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Why that?</q><br/> I asks. <q class="male-quote"> Why,</q><br/> says he, <q class="male-quote">heres another vacancy on the League of the Red-headed
               Men. It's worth quite a little fortune to any man who gets it, and I understand
               that there are more vacancies than there are men, so that the trustees are at
               their wits' end what to do with the money. If my hair would only change colour,
               here's a nice little crib all ready for me to step into.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Why, what is it, then?</q><br/> I asked. You see, Mr.
            Holmes, I am a very stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my
            having to go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting my foot over the
            door-mat. In that way I didn't know much of what was going on outside, and I was
            always glad of a bit of news. <q class="male-quote">Have you never heard
               of the League of the Red-headed Men?</q><br/> he asked with his eyes open. <q class="male-quote">Never.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible
               yourself for one of the vacancies.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">And what are they worth?</q><br/> I asked. <q class="male-quote">Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work
               is slight, and it need not interfere very much with one's other
               occupations.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my
            ears, for the business has not been over good for some years, and an extra couple
            of
            hundred would have been very handy.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Tell me all about it,</q><br/>
            said I. <q class="male-quote">Well,</q><br/> said <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding"> he, showing me the
               advertisement</span>, <q class="male-quote">you can see for
               yourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the address where you
               should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out, the League was founded
               by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, who was very peculiar in his ways.
               He was himself red-headed, and he had a great sympathy for all red-headed men;
               so, when he died, it was found that he had left his enormous fortune in the
               hands of trustees, with instructions to apply the interest to the providing of
               easy berths to men whose hair is of that colour. From all I hear it is splendid
               pay and very little to do.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">But,</q><br/> said I, <q class="male-quote">there
               would be millions of red-headed men who would apply.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Not so many as you might think,</q><br/> he answered.
            <q class="male-quote">You see it is really confined to Londoners, and
               to grown men. This American had started from London when he was young, and he
               wanted to do the old town a good turn. Then, again, I have heard it is no use
               your applying if your hair is light red, or dark red, or anything but real
               bright, blazing, fiery red. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. Wilson, you would
               just walk in; but perhaps it would hardly be worth your while to put yourself
               out of the way for the sake of a few hundred pounds.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves,
            that my hair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that if there
            was to be any competition in the matter I stood as good a chance as any man that I
            had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know so much about it that I thought he
            might prove useful, so <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I just
               ordered</span>
            <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">him to put up the
               shutters\ for the day and to come right away with me.</span> He was very
            willing to have a holiday, so we shut the business up and started off for the
            address that was given us in the advertisement.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes.
            From north, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in his hair had
            tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. Fleet Street was choked with
            red-headed folk, and Pope's Court looked like a coster's orange barrow. I should not
            have thought there were so many in the whole country as were brought together by
            that single advertisement. Every shade of colour they were—straw, lemon, orange,
            brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there were not many who
            had the real vivid flame-coloured tint. When I saw how many were waiting,
            <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I would have given it
               up</span> in despair; but Spaulding would not hear of it. How he did it I
            could not imagine, but <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">he
               pushed and pulled and butted</span> until <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">he got me through the crowd</span>, and
            right up to the steps which led to the office. There was a double stream upon the
            stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but <span class="male" title="jabezWilson, vincentSpaulding">we wedged
               in</span> as well as we could and soon found ourselves in the
            office.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your experience has been a most entertaining one,</q>
         remarked Holmes as <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">his client
            paused and refreshed his memory</span> with a huge pinch of snuff. <q class="sw-quote">Pray continue your very interesting statement.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden
            chairs and a deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that was even
            redder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he came up, and then
            <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">he always managed to
               find</span> some fault in them which would disqualify them. Getting a vacancy
            did not seem to be such a very easy matter, after all. However, when our turn came
            the little man was much more favourable to me than to any of the others, and
            <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">he closed the
               door</span> as we entered, so that he might have a private word with
            us.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">
            <q class="male-quote">This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,</q><br/> said my assistant,
            <q class="male-quote">and he is willing to fill a vacancy in the
               League.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">And he is admirably suited for it,</q><br/> the other
            answered. <q class="male-quote">He has every requirement. I cannot recall when
               I have seen anything so fine.</q><br/>
            <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">He took a step backward, cocked
               his head on one side, and gazed at my hair until I felt quite bashful.</span>
            Then suddenly <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">he plunged
               forward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on my success</span>.
            <q class="male-quote">It would be injustice to hesitate,</q><br/> said he.
            <q class="male-quote">You will, however, I am sure, excuse me for taking an
               obvious precaution.</q><br/> With that <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">he seized my hair in both his hands, and
               tugged</span> until I yelled with the pain. <q class="male-quote">There
               is water in your eyes,</q><br/> said he as <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">he released me</span>. <q class="male-quote">I perceive that all is as it should be. But we have to be careful, for we have
               twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell you tales of
               cobbler's wax which would disgust you with human nature.</q><br/>
            <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">He stepped over to the window
               and shouted</span> through it at the top of his voice that the vacancy was
            filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below, and the folk all trooped away
            in different directions until there was not a red-head to be seen except my own and
            that of the manager. <q class="male-quote">My name,</q><br/> said he, <q class="male-quote">is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of the pensioners
               upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you a married man, Mr. Wilson?
               Have you a family?</q><br/> I answered that <q class="male-quote">I had
               not</q><br/>. His face fell immediately. <q class="male-quote">Dear
               me!</q><br/> he said gravely, <q class="male-quote">that is very serious
               indeed! I am sorry to hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the
               propagation and spread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance. It is
               exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.</q><br/> My face lengthened
            at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was not to have the vacancy after all; but
            after thinking it over for a few minutes he said that it would be all right. <q class="male-quote">In the case of another,</q><br/> said he, <q class="male-quote"> the objection might be fatal, but we must stretch a point
               in favour of a man with such a head of hair as yours. When shall you be able to
               enter upon your new duties?</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Well, it is a little awkward, for I have a business
               already,</q><br/> said I. <q class="male-quote">Oh, never mind about
               that, Mr. Wilson!</q><br/> said Vincent Spaulding. <q class="male-quote">I should be able to look after that for you.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">What would be the hours?</q><br/> I asked. <q class="male-quote">Ten to two.</q>
            </q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Now a pawnbroker's business is mostly done of an evening,
            Mr. Holmes, especially Thursday and Friday evening, which is just before pay-day;
            so
            it would suit me very well to earn a little in the mornings. Besides, I knew that
            my
            assistant was a good man, and that he would see to anything that turned
            up.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">That would suit me very
               well,</q><br/> said I. <q class="male-quote">And the pay?</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Is £ 4 a week.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">And the work?</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Is purely nominal.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">What do you call purely nominal?</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the
               building, the whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever.
               The will is very clear upon that point. You don't comply with the conditions if
               you budge from the office during that time.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">It's only four hours a day, and I should not think of
               leaving,</q><br/> said I. <q class="male-quote">No excuse will avail,</q><br/>
            said Mr. Duncan Ross; <q class="male-quote">neither sickness nor business nor
               anything else. There you must stay, or you lose your billet.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">And the work?</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Is to copy out the _Encyclopædia Britannica_. There is
               the first volume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, and
               blotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you be ready
               to-morrow?</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Certainly,</q><br/> I answered. <q class="male-quote">Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you once more on the
               important position which you have been fortunate enough to gain.</q>
            <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">He bowed me out</span> of the
            room and <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I went home</span>
            with my assistant, hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my own good
            fortune.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I thought over the matter</span> all day, and by evening I was in
            low spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whole affair must be
            some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be I could not imagine. It
            seemed altogether past belief that anyone could make such a will, or that they would
            pay such a sum for doing anything so simple as copying out the _Encyclopædia
            Britannica_. <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">Vincent
               Spaulding did what he could</span> to cheer me up, but by bedtime
            <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I had reasoned myself
               out of the whole thing</span>. However, in the morning <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I determined to have a look</span>
            at it anyhow, so <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I bought a
               penny bottle of ink</span>, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap
            paper, <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I started off for
               Pope's Court</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as
            possible. The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross was there to see
            that I got fairly to work. <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">He
               started me off</span> upon the letter A, and then <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">he left me</span>; but <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">he would drop in</span> from time
            to time to see that all was right with me. At two o'clock <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">he bade me good-day, complimented me
               upon the amount that I had written, and locked the door of the office after
               me.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday
            <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">the manager came in and
               planked down four golden sovereigns</span> for my week's work. It was the same
            next week, and the same the week after. Every morning <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I was there at ten</span>, and every afternoon
            <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I left at
               two</span>. By degrees <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">Mr. Duncan
               Ross took to coming in only once of a morning</span>, and then,
            after a time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared to leave
            the room for an instant, for I was not sure when he might come, and the billet was
            such a good one, and suited me so well, that I would not risk the loss of
            it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Eight weeks passed away like this, and <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I had written</span> about Abbots
            and Archery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with diligence that
            I
            might get on to the B's before very long. It cost me something in foolscap, and
            <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I had pretty nearly
               filled a shelf</span> with my writings. And then suddenly the whole business
            came to an end.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">To an end?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I went to my work</span> as usual
            at ten o'clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a little square of cardboard
            hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Here it is, and you can read for
            yourself.</q></p>
      <p>He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet of note-paper. It
         read in
         this fashion:</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE IS DISSOLVED. October 9,
            1890.</q></p>
      <p>Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the rueful face behind it,
         until the comical side of the affair so completely overtopped every other consideration
         that we both burst out into a roar of laughter.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I cannot see that there is anything very funny,</q>
         cried our client, flushing up to the roots of his flaming head. <q class="male-quote">If you can do nothing better than laugh at me, I can go
            elsewhere.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, no,</q> cried Holmes, shoving him back into the
         chair from which he had half risen. <q class="sw-quote">I really wouldn't
            miss your case for the world. It is most refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you
            will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps
            did you take when you found the card upon the door?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then
            <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I called at the
               offices</span> round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it.
            Finally, <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I went to the
               landlord,</span> who is an accountant living on the ground floor, and I asked
            him if he could tell me what had become of the Red-headed League. He said that he
            had never heard of any such body. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He
            answered that the name was new to him.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Well,</q><br/> said I, <q class="male-quote">the gentleman at No. 4.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">What, the red-headed man?</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Yes.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Oh,</q><br/> said he, <q class="male-quote">his name
               was William Morris. He was a solicitor and was using my room as a temporary
               convenience until his new premises were ready. He moved out yesterday.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Where could I find him?</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Oh, at his new offices. He did tell me the address. Yes,
               17 King Edward Street, near St. Paul's.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote"><span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I
                  started off</span>, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was a
               manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard of either
               Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And what did you do then?</q> asked Holmes.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I went
               home to Saxe-Coburg Square</span>, and <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I
               took the advice</span> of my assistant. But he could not help me in any way.
            He could only say that if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite
            good enough, Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without a struggle, so,
            as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice to poor folk who were in
            need of it, <span class="male" title="jabezWilson">I came right away
               to you.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And you did very wisely,</q> said Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">Your case is an exceedingly remarkable one, and I shall be
            happy to look into it. From what you have told me I think that it is possible that
            graver issues hang from it than might at first sight appear.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Grave enough!</q> said Mr. Jabez Wilson. <q class="male-quote">Why, I have lost four pound a week.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">As far as you are personally concerned,</q> remarked
         Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">I do not see that you have any grievance against
            this extraordinary league. On the contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some
            £ 30, to say nothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every subject
            which comes under the letter A. You have lost nothing by them.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they
            are, and what their object was in playing this prank—if it was a prank—upon me. It
            was a pretty expensive joke for them, for it cost them two and thirty
            pounds.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. And,
            first, one or two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first called
            your attention to the advertisement—how long had he been with you?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">About a month then.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">How did he come?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">In answer to an advertisement.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Was he the only applicant?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">No, I had a dozen.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Why did you pick him?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Because he was handy and would come cheap.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">At half wages, in fact.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his
            face, though he's not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon his
            forehead.</q></p>
      <p>Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. <q class="sw-quote">I
            thought as much,</q> said he. <q class="sw-quote">Have you ever
            observed that his ears are pierced for earrings?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when
            he was a lad.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Hum!</q> said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought.
         <q class="sw-quote">He is still with you?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And has your business been attended to in your
            absence?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Nothing to complain of, sir. There's never very much to do
            of a morning.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an
            opinion upon the subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday, and I
            hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, Watson,</q> said Holmes when our visitor had
         left us, <q class="sw-quote">what do you make of it all?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I make nothing of it,</q> I answered frankly. <q class="sw-quote">It is a most mysterious business.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">As a rule,</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">the more bizarre a thing is the less mysterious it proves
            to be. It is your commonplace, featureless crimes which are really puzzling, just
            as
            a commonplace face is the most difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this
            matter.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What are you going to do, then?</q> I asked.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">To smoke,</q> he answered. <q class="sw-quote">It is quite a three pipe problem, and I beg that you won't
            speak to me for fifty minutes.</q>
         <span class="sw-action">He curled himself up in his
            chair</span>, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, and there
         <span class="sw-action">he sat with his eyes
            closed</span> and his black clay pipe thrusting out like the bill of some strange
         bird. <span class="sw-action">I had come to the
            conclusion</span> that he had dropped asleep, and indeed <span class="sw-action">was nodding myself</span>, when <span class="sw-action">he suddenly sprang out of his chair
            with the gesture of a man who has made up his mind and put his pipe down</span>
         upon the mantelpiece.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Sarasate plays at the St. James's Hall this
            afternoon,</q> he remarked. <q class="sw-quote">What do you think,
            Watson? Could your patients spare you for a few hours?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very
            absorbing.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Then put on your hat and come. <span class="sw-action">I am going through the
               City</span> first, and we can have some lunch on the way. <span class="sw-action">I observe</span> that there is
            a good deal of German music on the programme, which is rather more to my taste than
            Italian or French. It is introspective, and I want to introspect. Come
            along!</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">We
            travelled</span> by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short walk took us
         to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular story which we had listened to in
         the
         morning. It was a poky, little, shabby-genteel place, where four lines of dingy
         two-storied brick houses looked out into a small railed-in enclosure, where a lawn
         of
         weedy grass and a few clumps of faded laurel bushes made a hard fight against a
         smoke-laden and uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls and a brown board with "JABEZ
         WILSON" in white letters, upon a corner house, announced the place where our red-headed
         client carried on his business. <span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes stopped in front</span> of it with his head on one
         side and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly between puckered lids.
         Then
         <span class="sw-action">he walked slowly up the
            street</span>, and then down again to the corner, still looking keenly at the
         houses. Finally <span class="sw-action">he returned to
            the pawnbroker's</span>, and, having thumped vigorously upon the pavement with his
         stick two or three times, he went up to the door and knocked. It was instantly
         <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">opened by a bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow</span>, who asked him to step in.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Thank you,</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">I only wished to ask you how you would go from here to the
            Strand.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Third right, fourth left,</q> answered the
         <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">assistant promptly, closing the
            door.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Smart fellow, that,</q> observed Holmes as we walked
         away. <q class="sw-quote">He is, in my judgment, the fourth smartest man in
            London, and for daring I am not sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have
            known something of him before.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Evidently,</q> said I, <q class="sw-quote">Mr.
            Wilson's assistant counts for a good deal in this mystery of the Red-headed League.
            I am sure that you inquired your way merely in order that you might see
            him.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Not him.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The knees of his trousers.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And what did you see?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What I expected to see.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Why did you beat the pavement?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for
            talk. We are spies in an enemy's country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.
            Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it.</q></p>
      <p>The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from the retired
         Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast to it as the front of a picture does
         to
         the back. It was one of the main arteries which conveyed the traffic of the City to
         the
         north and west. The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerce flowing
         in a
         double tide inward and outward, while the footpaths were black with the hurrying swarm
         of pedestrians. It was difficult to realise as we looked at the line of fine shops
         and
         stately business premises that they really abutted on the other side upon the faded
         and
         stagnant square which we had just quitted.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Let me see,</q> said <span class="sw-action">Holmes, standing at the corner and
            glancing</span> along the line, <q class="sw-quote">I should like just
            to remember the order of the houses here. It is a hobby of mine to have an exact
            knowledge of London. There is Mortimer's, the tobacconist, the little newspaper
            shop, the Coburg branch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian Restaurant,
            and McFarlane's carriage-building depot. That carries us right on to the other
            block. And now, Doctor, we've done our work, so it's time we had some play. A
            sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land, where all is sweetness
            and delicacy and harmony, and there are no red-headed clients to vex us with their
            conundrums.</q></p>
      <p>My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a very capable performer
         but a composer of no ordinary merit. All the afternoon <span class="sw-action">he sat in the stalls</span> wrapped in the most
         perfect happiness, gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while
         his
         gently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those of Holmes the
         sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal agent, as
         it was
         possible to conceive. In his singular character the dual nature alternately asserted
         itself, and his extreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have often thought,
         the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood which occasionally predominated
         in him. The swing of his nature took him from extreme languor to devouring energy;
         and,
         as I knew well, he was never so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had
         been
         lounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and his black-letter editions. Then
         it
         was that the lust of the chase would suddenly come upon him, and that his brilliant
         reasoning power would rise to the level of intuition, until those who were unacquainted
         with his methods would look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not that
         of
         other mortals. When I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped in the music at St. James's
         Hall I felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had set himself to
         hunt
         down.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor,</q> he
         remarked as we emerged.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Yes, it would be as well.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And I have some business to do which will take some
            hours. This business at Coburg Square is serious.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Why serious?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every
            reason to believe that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being Saturday
            rather complicates matters. I shall want your help to-night.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">At what time?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Ten will be early enough.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I shall be at Baker Street at ten.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little
            danger, so kindly put your army revolver in your pocket.</q>
         <span class="sw-action">He waved his hand, turned on
            his heel, and disappeared in an instant</span> among the crowd.</p>
      <p>I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I was always oppressed with
         a
         sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with Sherlock Holmes. Here I had heard what
         he
         had heard, I had seen what he had seen, and yet from his words it was evident that
         he
         saw clearly not only what had happened but what was about to happen, while to me the
         whole business was still confused and grotesque. As I drove home to my house in
         Kensington <span class="sw-action">I thought over it
            all</span>, from the extraordinary story of the red-headed copier of the
         _Encyclopædia_ down to the visit to Saxe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words with
         which
         he had parted from me. What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go armed?
         Where were we going, and what were we to do? I had the hint from Holmes that this
         smooth-faced pawnbroker's assistant was a formidable man—a man who might play a deep
         game. <span class="sw-action">I tried to puzzle it
            out</span>, but gave it up in despair and set the matter aside until night should
         bring an explanation.</p>
      <p>It was a quarter-past nine when <span class="sw-action">I
            started from home</span> and made my way across the Park, and so through Oxford
         Street to Baker Street. Two hansoms were
         standing at the door, and as <span class="sw-action">I entered the passage</span> I heard the sound of voices from above.
         On entering his room, <span class="sw-action">I found
            Holmes</span> in animated conversation with two men, one of whom I recognised as
         Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the other was a long, thin, sad-faced
         man,
         with a very shiny hat and oppressively respectable frock-coat.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Ha! Our party is complete,</q> said <span class="sw-action">Holmes, buttoning up his pea-jacket
            and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack</span>. <q class="sw-quote">Watson, I think you know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let
            me introduce you to Mr. Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-night's
            adventure.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">We're hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see,</q> said
         Jones in his consequential way. <q class="male-quote">Our friend here is a
            wonderful man for starting a chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the
            running down.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our
            chase,</q> observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes,
            sir,</q> said the police agent loftily. <q class="male-quote">He has his
            own little methods, which are, if he won't mind my saying so, just a little too
            theoretical and fantastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not
            too much to say that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and the
            Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than the official force.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right,</q>
         said the stranger with deference. <q class="male-quote">Still, I confess that
            I miss my rubber. It is the first Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I
            have not had my rubber.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I think you will find,</q> said Sherlock Holmes,
         <q class="sw-quote">that you will play for a higher stake to-night than
            you have ever done yet, and that the play will be more exciting. For you, Mr.
            Merryweather, the stake will be some £ 30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the
            man upon whom you wish to lay your hands.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He's a
            young man, Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and I would
            rather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London. He's a remarkable
            man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke, and he himself has been
            to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning as his fingers, and though we meet signs
            of him at every turn, we never know where to find the man himself. He'll crack a
            crib in Scotland one week, and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall
            the next. I've been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him
            yet.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you
            to-night. I've had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree with
            you that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten, however, and quite
            time that we started. If you two will take the first hansom, Watson and I will
            follow in the second.</q></p>
      <p>Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive and lay back in the
         cab
         humming the tunes which he had heard in the afternoon. We rattled through an endless
         labyrinth of gas-lit streets until we emerged into Farrington Street.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">We are close there now,</q> my friend remarked.
         <q class="sw-quote">This fellow Merryweather is a bank director, and
            personally interested in the matter. I thought it as well to have Jones with us
            also. He is not a bad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profession. He has
            one positive virtue. He is as brave as a bulldog and as tenacious as a lobster if
            he
            gets his claws upon anyone. Here we are, and they are waiting for us.</q></p>
      <p>We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had found ourselves in the
         morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, following the guidance of Mr. Merryweather,
         we
         passed down a narrow passage and through a side door, which <span class="male" title="mrMerryweather">he opened for us</span>. Within there was a small
         corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also was opened, and led down
         a
         flight of winding stone steps, which terminated at another formidable gate.
         <span class="male" title="mrMerryweather">Mr. Merryweather
            stopped to light a lantern</span>, and then conducted us down a dark,
         earth-smelling passage, and so, after opening a third door, into a huge vault or cellar,
         which was piled all round with crates and massive boxes.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You are not very vulnerable from above,</q> Holmes
         remarked as he held up the lantern and gazed about him.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Nor from below,</q> said <span class="male" title="mrMerryweather">Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon the flags</span> which lined
         the floor. <q class="male-quote">Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!</q>
         he remarked, looking up in surprise.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!</q>
         said Holmes severely. <q class="sw-quote">You have already imperilled the
            whole success of our expedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit
            down upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?</q></p>
      <p>The solemn <span class="male" title="mrMerryweather">Mr. Merryweather
            perched himself upon a crate</span>, with a very injured expression upon his face,
         while <span class="sw-action">Holmes fell upon his
            knees upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began to
            examine</span> minutely the cracks between the stones. A few seconds sufficed to
         satisfy him, for <span class="sw-action">he sprang to
            his feet again and put his glass in his pocket.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">We have at least an hour before us,</q> he remarked,
         <q class="sw-quote">for they can hardly take any steps until the good
            pawnbroker is safely in bed. Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they
            do their work the longer time they will have for their escape. We are at present,
            Doctor—as no doubt you have divined—in the cellar of the City branch of one of the
            principal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the chairman of directors, and he will
            explain to you that there are reasons why the more daring criminals of London should
            take a considerable interest in this cellar at present.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">It is our French gold,</q> whispered the director.
         <q class="male-quote">We have had several warnings that an attempt might
            be made upon it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your French gold?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our
            resources and borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France.
            It
            has become known that we have never had occasion to unpack the money, and that it
            is
            still lying in our cellar. The crate upon which I sit contains 2,000 napoleons
            packed between layers of lead foil. Our reserve of bullion is much larger at present
            than is usually kept in a single branch office, and the directors have had
            misgivings upon the subject.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Which were very well justified,</q> observed Holmes.
         <q class="sw-quote">And now it is time that we arranged our little
            plans. I expect that within an hour matters will come to a head. In the meantime Mr.
            Merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">And sit in the dark?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my
            pocket, and I thought that, as we were a _partie carrée_, you might have your rubber
            after all. But I see that the enemy's preparations have gone so far that we cannot
            risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we must choose our positions. These
            are daring men, and though we shall take them at a disadvantage, they may do us some
            harm unless we are careful. I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal
            yourselves behind those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If
            they fire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting them down.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I placed my revolver, cocked, upon
            the top of the wooden case</span> behind which I crouched. <span class="sw-action">Holmes shot the slide across the
            front of his lantern</span> and left us in pitch darkness—such an absolute
         darkness as I have never before experienced. The smell of hot metal remained to assure
         us that the light was still there, ready to flash out at a moment's notice. To me,
         with
         my nerves worked up to a pitch of expectancy, there was something depressing and
         subduing in the sudden gloom, and in the cold dank air of the vault.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">They have but one retreat,</q> whispered Holmes.
         <q class="sw-quote">That is back through the house into Saxe-Coburg
            Square. I hope that you have done what I asked you, Jones?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><span class="male" title="peterJones">I have
               an inspector and two officers waiting</span> at the front door.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be
            silent and wait.</q></p>
      <p>What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but an hour and a quarter,
         yet it appeared to me that the night must have almost gone, and the dawn be breaking
         above us. My limbs were weary and stiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my
         nerves were worked up to the highest pitch of tension, and my hearing was so acute
         that
         I could not only hear the gentle breathing of my companions, but I could distinguish
         the
         deeper, heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from the thin, sighing note of the bank
         director. From my position I could look over the case in the direction of the floor.
         Suddenly my eyes caught the glint of a light.</p>
      <p>At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then it lengthened out
         until
         it became a yellow line, and then, without any warning or sound, a gash seemed to
         open
         and a hand appeared, a white, <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">almost womanly hand, which felt about in the centre</span> of
         the little area of light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writhing fingers,
         protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly as it appeared, and
         all
         was dark again save the single lurid spark which marked a chink between the stones.</p>
      <p>Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending, tearing sound, one
         of the
         broad, white stones turned over upon its side and left a square, gaping hole, through
         which streamed the light of a lantern. Over the edge there <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">peeped a clean-cut, boyish face</span>,
         which looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand on either side of the aperture,
         <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">drew itself shoulder-high
            and waist-high, until one knee rested upon the edge</span>. In another instant
         <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">he stood at the side
            of the hole and was hauling after him a companion</span>, lithe and small like
         himself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">It's all clear,</q> he whispered. <q class="male-quote">Have you the chisel and the bags? Great Scott! Jump,
            Archie, jump, and I'll swing for it!</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes had sprung out
            and seized the intruder by the collar</span>. The other dived down the hole, and I
         heard the sound of rending cloth as <span class="male" title="peterJones">Jones clutched at his skirts</span>. The light flashed upon the barrel
         of a revolver, but <span class="sw-action">Holmes'
            hunting crop came down</span> on the man's wrist, and the pistol clinked upon the
         stone floor.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It's no use, John Clay,</q> said Holmes blandly.
         <q class="sw-quote">You have no chance at all.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">So I see,</q> the other answered with the utmost
         coolness. <q class="male-quote">I fancy that my pal is all right, though I
            see you have got his coat-tails.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">There are three men waiting for him at the door,</q>
         said Holmes.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very
            completely. I must compliment you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And I you,</q> Holmes answered. <q class="sw-quote">Your red-headed idea was very new and
            effective.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">You'll see your pal again presently,</q> said Jones.
         <q class="male-quote">He's quicker at climbing down holes than I am. Just hold
            out while I fix the derbies.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy
            hands,</q> remarked our prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists.
         <q class="male-quote">You may not be aware that I have royal blood in my
            veins. Have the goodness, also, when you address me always to say 'sir' and
            'please.'</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">All right,</q> said Jones with a stare and a snigger.
         <q class="male-quote">Well, would you please, sir, march upstairs, where we
            can get a cab to carry your Highness to the police-station?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">That is better,</q> said John Clay serenely.
         <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">He made a sweeping
            bow to the three of us and walked quietly off</span> in the custody of the
         detective.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Really, Mr. Holmes,</q> said Mr. Merryweather as we
         followed them from the cellar, <q class="male-quote">I do not know how the
            bank can thank you or repay you. There is no doubt that you have detected and
            defeated in the most complete manner one of the most determined attempts at bank
            robbery that have ever come within my experience.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle
            with Mr. John Clay,</q> said Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">I have been
            at some small expense over this matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but
            beyond that I am amply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways
            unique, and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of the Red-headed
            League.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You see, Watson,</q> he explained in the early hours
         of the morning as we sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, <q class="sw-quote">it was perfectly obvious from the first that the only
            possible object of this rather fantastic business of the advertisement of the
            League, and the copying of the _Encyclopædia_, must be to get this not over-bright
            pawnbroker out of the way for a number of hours every day. It was a curious way of
            managing it, but, really, it would be difficult to suggest a better. The method was
            no doubt suggested to Clay's ingenious mind by the colour of his accomplice's hair.
            The £ 4 a week was a lure which must draw him, and what was it to them, who were
            playing for thousands? <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding, duncanRoss">They put in the
               advertisement</span>, <span class="male" title="duncanRoss">one
               rogue has the temporary office</span>, <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">the other rogue incites the man to
               apply</span> for it, and together they manage to secure his absence every
            morning in the week. From the time that I heard of the assistant having come for
            half wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motive for securing the
            situation.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">But how could you guess what the motive was?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Had there been women in the house, I should have
            suspected a mere vulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The man's
            business was a small one, and there was nothing in his house which could account for
            such elaborate preparations, and such an expenditure as they were at. It must, then,
            be something out of the house. What could it be? I thought of the assistant's
            fondness for photography, and his trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar!
            There was the end of this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as to this mysterious
            assistant and found that I had to deal with one of the coolest and most daring
            criminals in London. He was doing something in the cellar—something which took many
            hours a day for months on end. What could it be, once more? I could think of nothing
            save that <span class="male" title="vincentSpaulding">he was running a tunnel</span> to
            some other building.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of
            action. I surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I was
            ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. It was not in
            front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the assistant answered it. We have had
            some skirmishes, but we had never set eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked
            at his face. His knees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked
            how worn, wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours of burrowing.
            The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. I walked round the
            corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on our friend's premises, and felt
            that I had solved my problem. When you drove home after the concert I called upon
            Scotland Yard and upon the chairman of the bank directors, with the result that you
            have seen.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And how could you tell that they would make their attempt
            to-night?</q> I asked.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, when they closed their League offices that was a
            sign that they cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence—in other words,
            that they had completed their tunnel. But it was essential that they should use it
            soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion might be removed. Saturday would
            suit them better than any other day, as it would give them two days for their
            escape. For all these reasons I expected them to come to-night.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You reasoned it out beautifully,</q> I exclaimed in
         unfeigned admiration. <q class="sw-quote">It is so long a chain, and yet every
            link rings true.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It saved me from ennui,</q> he answered, yawning.
         <q class="sw-quote">Alas! I already feel it closing in upon me. My life
            is spent in one long effort to escape from the commonplaces of existence. These
            little problems help me to do so.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And you are a benefactor of the race,</q> said I.</p>
      <p>He shrugged his shoulders. <q class="sw-quote">Well, perhaps, after all, it
            is of some little use,</q> he remarked. <q class="sw-quote">'_L'homme c'est rien—l'œuvre c'est tout_,' as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George
            Sand.</q></p>
      <p>When <span class="sw-action">I glance over my notes and records</span> of the Sherlock Holmes cases
         between the years ’82 and ’90, I am faced by so many which present
         strange and interesting features that it is no easy matter to know
         which to choose and which to leave. Some, however, have already gained
         publicity through the papers, and others have not offered a field for
         those peculiar qualities which my friend possessed in so high a degree,
         and which it is the object of these papers to illustrate. Some, too,
         have baffled his analytical skill, and would be, as narratives,
         beginnings without an ending, while others have been but partially
         cleared up, and have their explanations founded rather upon conjecture
         and surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear to
         him. There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable in
         its details and so startling in its results that <span class="sw-action"> I am tempted to give
            some account of it</span> in spite of the fact that there are points in
         connection with it which never have been, and probably never will be,
         entirely cleared up.</p>
      <p>The year ’87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater or
         less interest, of which I retain the records. Among my headings under
         this one twelve months I find an account of the adventure of the
         Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant Society, who held a luxurious
         club in the lower vault of a furniture warehouse, of the facts
         connected with the loss of the British barque Sophy Anderson, of the
         singular adventures of the Grice Patersons in the island of Uffa, and
         finally of the Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, as may be
         remembered,<span class="sw-action"> Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead man’s
            watch, to prove that it had been wound up two hours before, and that
            therefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time—a deduction
            which was of the greatest importance in clearing up the case.</span> All these
         I may sketch out at some future date, but none of them present such
         singular features as the strange train of circumstances which <span class="sw-action">I have
            now taken up my pen to describe</span>.</p>
      <p>It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales had
         set in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had screamed and the
         rain had beaten against the windows, so that even here in the heart of
         great, hand-made London we were forced to raise our minds for the
         instant from the routine of life and to recognise the presence of those
         great elemental forces which shriek at mankind through the bars of his
         civilisation, like untamed beasts in a cage. As evening drew in, the
         storm grew higher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like a
         child in the chimney. <span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one side of the
            fireplace cross-indexing his records of crime</span>, while <span class="sw-action">I at the other was
            deep in one of Clark Russell’s fine sea-stories </span>until the howl of the
         gale from without seemed to blend with the text, and the splash of the
         rain to lengthen out into the long swash of the sea waves.<span class="female female" title="maryWatson mrsMorston">My wife was
            on a visit to her mother’s</span>, and for a few days I was a dweller once
         more in my old quarters at Baker Street.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Why,”</q> said I, glancing up at my companion, <q class="sw-quote">“that was surely the bell.
            Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Except yourself I have none,”</q> he answered. <q class="sw-quote">“I do not encourage
            visitors.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“A client, then?”</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">“If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out on
            such a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely to
            be some crony of the landlady’s.”</q></p>
      <p>Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there came a
         step in the passage and a tapping at the door. <span class="sw-action"> He stretched out his
            long arm to turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacant
            chair upon which a newcomer must sit.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Come in!”</q> said he.</p>
      <p>The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the outside,
         well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of refinement and delicacy
         in his bearing. The streaming umbrella which he held in his hand, and
         his long shining waterproof told of the fierce weather through which he
         had come. <span class="male" title="johnOpenshaw">He looked about him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I
            could see that his face was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of a
            man who is weighed down with some great anxiety.</span></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“I owe you an apology,”</q> he said, <span class="male" title="johnOpenshaw"> raising his golden pince-nez to his
            eyes</span>. <q class="male-quote">“I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have brought some
            traces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Give me your coat and umbrella,”</q> said Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">“They may rest here on
            the hook and will be dry presently. You have come up from the
            south-west, I see.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“Yes, from Horsham.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps is quite
            distinctive.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“I have come for advice.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“That is easily got.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“And help.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“That is not always so easy.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major Prendergast how
            you saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“He said that <span class="" title="">you could solve anything</span>.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“He said too much.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“That you are never beaten.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“I have <span class="male" title="u_men"> been beaten four times—three times by men</span>, 
            and once <span class="female" title="u_woman">by a woman</span>.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“But what is that compared with the number of your successes?”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“It is true that I have been generally successful.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“Then you may be so with me.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour me with
            some details as to your case.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“It is no ordinary one.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of appeal.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“And yet <span class="male" title="johnOpenshaw">I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you have
               ever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of events
               than those which have happened in my own family</span>.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“You fill me with interest,”</q> said Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">“Pray give us the essential
            facts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as to
            those details which seem to me to be most important.”</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="johnOpenshaw">The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out towards
            the blaze.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“My dear fellow,”</q> said Sherlock Holmes as we sat
         on either side of the fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, <q class="sw-quote">“life is infinitely stranger than anything which the mind
            of man could invent. We would not dare to conceive the things which are really mere
            commonplaces of existence. If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover
            over this great city, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the queer things which
            are going on, the strange coincidences, the plannings, the cross-purposes, the
            wonderful chains of events, working through generations, and leading to the most
            outré results, it would make all fiction with its conventionalities and foreseen
            conclusions most stale and unprofitable.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“And yet I am not convinced of it,”</q> I answered.
         <q class="sw-quote">“The cases which come to light in the papers are, as a
            rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough. We have in our police reports realism pushed
            to its extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither
            fascinating nor artistic.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“A certain selection and discretion must be used in
            producing a realistic effect,”</q> remarked Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">“This is wanting in the police report, where more stress is
            laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which
            to
            an observer contain the vital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it, there is
            nothing so unnatural as the commonplace.”</q></p>
      <p>I smiled and shook my head. <q class="sw-quote">“I can quite understand your
            thinking so,”</q> I said. <q class="sw-quote">“Of course, in your
            position of unofficial adviser and helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled,
            throughout three continents, you are brought in contact with all that is strange and
            bizarre. But here”</q>—I picked up the morning paper from the ground—<q class="sw-quote">“let us put it to a practical test. Here is the first heading
            upon which I come. ‘<span class="male female" title="u_husband u_wife">A husband’s cruelty to his wife</span>.’ There is half a column of
            print, but I know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me. There
            is, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the
            sympathetic sister or landlady. The crudest of writers could invent nothing more
            crude.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your
            argument,”</q> said Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it.
         <q class="sw-quote">“This is the Dundas separation case, and, as it happens,
            <span class="sw-action"> I was engaged in clearing up some small points in
               connection with it</span>. The husband was a teetotaler, there was no other
            woman, and the conduct complained of was that <span class="male" title="u_husband">he had
               drifted into the habit of winding up every meal by taking out his false teeth
               and hurling them at his wife, which, you will allow, is not an action
               likely to occur to the imagination of the average story-teller</span>. Take a pinch of
            snuff, Doctor, and acknowledge that I have scored over you in your
            example.”</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in the centre of the lid</span>. Its
         splendour was in such contrast to his homely ways and simple life that I could not
         help
         commenting upon it.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Ah,”</q> said he, <q class="sw-quote">“I
            forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It is a little souvenir from the King
            of Bohemia in return for my assistance in the case of the Irene Adler
            papers.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“And the ring?”</q> I asked, glancing at a remarkable
         brilliant which sparkled upon his finger.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the
            matter in which I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even to
            you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my little
            problems.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“And have you any on hand just now?”</q> I asked with
         interest.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature
            of interest. They are important, you understand, without being interesting. Indeed,
            I have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that there is a field for the
            observation, and for the quick analysis of cause and effect which gives the charm
            to
            an investigation. The larger crimes are apt to be the simpler, for the bigger the
            crime the more obvious, as a rule, is the motive. In these cases, save for one
            rather intricate matter which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is
            nothing which presents any features of interest. It is possible, however, that I may
            have something better before very many minutes are over, for this is one of my
            clients, or I am much mistaken.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted blinds gazing down
         into
         the dull neutral-tinted London street. Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the
         pavement opposite there stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and
         a
         large curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a coquettish
         Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her ear. <span class="female" title="marySutherland"> From under
            this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at our windows,
            while her body oscillated backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with her
            glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leaves the bank, she
            hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp clang of the bell</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“I have seen those symptoms before,”</q> said Holmes,
         throwing his cigarette into the fire. <q class="sw-quote">“Oscillation upon
            the pavement always means an _affaire de cœur_. She would like advice, but is not
            sure that the matter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here we may
            discriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she no longer
            oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wire. Here we may take it that
            there is a love matter, but that the maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or
            grieved. <span class="female" title="marySutherland"> But here she comes in person to resolve our
               doubts</span>.”</q></p>
      <p>As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons entered to announce
         Miss
         Mary Sutherland, <span class="female" title="marySutherland"> while the lady herself loomed behind his
            small black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man behind a tiny pilot
            boat</span>. <span class="sw-action"> Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with the easy
            courtesy for which he was remarkable, and, having closed the door and bowed her into
            an armchair, he looked her over in the minute and yet abstracted fashion which was
            peculiar to him</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Do you not find,”</q> he said, <q class="sw-quote">“that with your short sight it is a little trying to do so
            much typewriting?”</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">“I did at first,”</q> she answered, <q class="female-quote">“but now I know where the letters are without
            looking.”</q> Then, <span class="female" title="marySutherland"> suddenly realising the full
            purport of his words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear and
            astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. <q class="female-quote">“You’ve heard about me, Mr. Holmes,”</q> she cried</span>, <q class="female-quote">“else how could you know all that?”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Never mind,”</q> said Holmes, laughing; <q class="sw-quote">“it is my business to know things. Perhaps I have trained
            myself to see what others overlook. If not, why should you come to consult
            me?”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs.
            Etherege,<span class="sw-action"> whose husband you found so easy when the
               police and everyone had given him up for dead</span>. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish
            you would do as much for me. I’m not rich, but still I have a hundred a year in my
            own right, besides the little that I make by the machine, and I would give it all
            to
            know what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Why did you come away to consult me in such a
            hurry?”</q> asked Sherlock Holmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes to
         the ceiling.</p>
      <p>     Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face
         of Miss Mary Sutherland. <q class="female-quote">“Yes, I did bang
            out of the house,”</q> she said, <q class="female-quote">“for it made me
            angry to see the easy way in which <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank"> Mr. Windibank—that
               is, my father—took it all. He would not go to the police, and he would not go to
               you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on saying that there was no
               harm done</span>, <span class="female" title="marySutherland"> it made me mad, and I just on
               with my things and came right away to you</span>.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">"Your father,”</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">“your stepfather, surely, since the name is
            different.”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Yes, my stepfather. I
            call him father, though it sounds funny, too, for he is only five years
            and two months older than myself.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“And your mother is alive?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn’t best
            pleased, Mr. Holmes, when <span class="female" title="mrsSutherland"> she married again so soon
               after father’s death, and a man who was nearly fifteen years younger than
               herself</span>. Father was a plumber in the Tottenham Court Road, and he left
            a tidy business behind him, which mother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the foreman; but
            when Mr. Windibank came <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank"> he made her sell the business,
               for he was very superior, being a traveller in wines</span>. They got £ 4700
            for the goodwill and interest, which wasn’t near as much as father could have got
            if
            he had been alive.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under this rambling and inconsequential
         narrative, but, on the contrary, <span class="sw-action"> he had listened with the
            greatest concentration of attention.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Your own little income,”</q> he asked, <q class="sw-quote">“does it come out of the business?”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Oh, no, sir. It is quite separate and was <span class="" title="">
               <span class="male" title="ned">left me by my uncle Ned in Auckland</span>. It is in New Zealand stock,
               paying 4½ per cent. Two thousand five hundred pounds was the amount</span>,
            but I can only touch the interest.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“You interest me extremely,”</q> said Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">“And since you draw so large a sum as a hundred a year,
            with what you earn into the bargain, you no doubt travel a little and indulge
            yourself in every way. I believe that a single lady can get on very nicely upon an
            income of about £ 60.”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but
            you understand that as long as I live at home I don’t wish to be a burden to them,
            and so they have the use of the money just while I am staying with them. Of course,
            that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank draws my interest every quarter and
            pays it over to mother, and <span class="male" title="mnarySutherland"> I find that I can do
               pretty well with what I earn at typewriting. It brings me twopence a sheet, and
               I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day.</span>”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“You have made your position very clear to me,”</q>
         said Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">“This is my friend, Dr. Watson, before whom
            you can speak as freely as before myself. Kindly tell us now all about your
            connection with Mr. Hosmer Angel.”</q></p>
      <p>A flush stole over Miss Sutherland’s face, and she picked nervously at the fringe
         of her
         jacket. <q class="female-quote">“I met him first at the gasfitters’
            ball,”</q> she said. <q class="female-quote">“They used to send father
            tickets when he was alive, and then afterwards they remembered us, and sent them to
            mother. <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank"> Mr. Windibank did not wish us to go. He never
               did wish us to go anywhere. He would get quite mad if I wanted so much as to
               join a Sunday-school treat. But this time I was set on going, and I would go;
               for what right had he to prevent? He said the folk were not fit for us to know,
               when all father’s friends were to be there. And he said that I had nothing fit
               to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so much as taken out of the
               drawer. At last, when nothing else would do, he went off to France upon the
               business of the firm</span>, but we went, mother and I, with Mr. Hardy, who
            used to be our foreman, and it was there I met Mr. Hosmer Angel.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“I suppose,”</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">“that when <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank"> Mr. Windibank   came
               back from France he was very annoyed at your having gone to the
               ball</span>.”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Oh, well, <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank"> he was very good about it. He laughed, I
               remember, and shrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything to
               a woman, for she would have her way.</span>”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“I see. Then at the gasfitters’ ball you met, as I
            understand, a gentleman called Mr. Hosmer Angel.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Yes, sir. <span class="female" title="marySutherland"> I met him that
               night, and he called next day to ask if we had got home all safe, and after that
               we met him—that is to say</span>, Mr. Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but
            after that father came back again, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house
            any more.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“No?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Well, you know father didn’t like anything of the sort.
            <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank"> He wouldn’t have any visitors if he could help it,
               and he used to say that a woman should be happy in her own family
               circle</span>. But then, as I used to say to mother, a woman wants her own
            circle to begin with, and I had not got mine yet.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel? Did he make no attempt
            to see you?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Well, <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank"> father was going off
               to France again in a week</span>, and <span class="male" title="hosmerAngel">Hosmer wrote
               and said that it would be safer and better not to see each other until he had
               gone</span>. We could write in the meantime, and he used to write every day. I
            took the letters in in the morning, so there was no need for father to
            know.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Were you engaged to the gentleman at this
            time?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged after the first
            walk that we took. <span class="male" title="hosmerAngel"> Hosmer—Mr. Angel—was a cashier in an office in Leadenhall
               Street—and</span>—”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“What office?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“That’s the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don’t
            know.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Where did he live, then?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“He slept on the premises.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“And you don’t know his address?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“No—except that it was Leadenhall Street.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Where did you address your letters, then?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till
            called for. He said that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by all
            the other clerks about having letters from a lady, so <span class="female" title="marySutherland"> 
               I offered to typewrite them, <span class="male" title="hosmerAngel"> like he did his, </span>but he wouldn’t have
               that, for he said that when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when they
               were typewritten he always felt that the machine had come between us. </span>That will just
            show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes, and the little things that he would
            think of.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“It was most suggestive,”</q> said Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">“It has long been an axiom of mine that the little things
            are infinitely the most important. Can you remember any other little things about
            Mr. Hosmer Angel?”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes.<span class="male" title="hosmerAngel"> He would rather walk
               with me in the evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to be
               conspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice was gentle. He’d
               had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, he told me, and it had left him
               with a weak throat, and a hesitating, whispering fashion of speech. He was always
               well dressed, very neat and plain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he
               wore tinted glasses against the glare</span>.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Well, and what happened when <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank">
               Mr. Windibank, your stepfather, returned to
               France</span>?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“<span class="male" title="hosmerAngel"> Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the
               house again and proposed that we should marry before father came back. He was in
               dreadful earnest and made me swear, with my hands on the Testament, that
               whatever happened I would always be true to him.</span><span class="female" title="mrsSutherland"> Mother said he was quite right to make me swear, and that
               it was a sign of his passion. Mother was all in his favour from the first and
               was even fonder of him than I was. Then, when they talked of marrying within the
               week, I began to ask about father; but they both said never to mind about
               father, but just to tell him afterwards, and mother said she would make it all
               right with him.</span> <span class="female" title="marySutherland">I didn’t quite like that,
               Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should ask his leave, as he was only a few
               years older than me; but I didn’t want to do anything on the sly, so I wrote to
               father at Bordeaux, where the company has its French offices, but the letter
               came back to me on the very morning of the wedding</span>.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“It missed him, then?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Yes, sir; <span class="male" title="hosmerAngel"> for he had started
               to England just before it arrived</span>.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Ha! that was unfortunate. Your wedding was arranged,
            then, for the Friday. Was it to be in church?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St.
            Saviour’s, near King’s Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St.
            Pancras Hotel. Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two of us he put
            us
            both into it and stepped himself into a four-wheeler, which happened to be the only
            other cab in the street. We got to the church first, and when the four-wheeler drove
            up we waited for him to step out, 
            but he never did,and when the cabman got down from the box and looked there was no
            one there! The
            cabman said that he could not imagine what had become of him, for he had seen
            him get in with his own eyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never
            seen or heard anything since then to throw any light upon what became of
            him.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“It seems to me that you have been very shamefully
            treated,”</q> said Holmes.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Oh, no, sir! <span class="male" title="hosmerAngel"> He was too good
               and kind to leave me so. Why, all the morning he was saying to me that, whatever
               happened, I was to be true; and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred
               to separate us, I was always to remember that I was pledged to him, and that he
               would claim his pledge sooner or later.</span> It seemed strange talk for a
            wedding-morning, but what has happened since gives a meaning to it.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, then, that
            some unforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Yes, sir. <span class="female" title="marySutherland">I believe that
               <span class="male" title="hosmerAngel">he foresaw some danger, or
                  else he would not have talked so.</span> And then I think that what he foresaw
               happened</span>.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“But you have no notion as to what it could have
            been?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“None.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“One more question. How did your mother take the
            matter?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“<span class="female" title="mrsSutherland">She was angry, and said
               that I was never to speak of the matter again</span>.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“And your father? Did you tell him?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Yes; and<span class="male" title="jamesWindibank"> he seemed to think, with me, that something
               had happened, and that I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said, what interest
               could anyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then leaving me?</span>
            Now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married me and got my money settled
            on him, there might be some reason, but Hosmer was very independent about money and
            never would look at a shilling of mine. And yet, what could have happened? And why
            could he not write? Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and I can’t sleep a
            wink at night.”</q>
         <span class="female" title="marySutherland"> She pulled a little handkerchief out of her muff and began
            to sob heavily into it.</span>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“I shall glance into the case for you,”</q> said
         Holmes, rising, <q class="sw-quote">“and I have no doubt that we shall reach
            some definite result. Let the weight of the matter rest upon me now, and do not let
            your mind dwell upon it further. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel vanish from
            your memory, <span class="male" title="hosmerAngel"> as he has done from your
               life</span>.”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Then you don’t think I’ll see him again?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“I fear not.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“Then what has happened to him?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“You will leave that question in my hands. I should like
            an accurate description of him and any letters of his which you can spare.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">“<span class="male" title="marySutherland"> I advertised for him in
               last Saturday’s Chronicle</span>,”</q> said she. <q class="female-quote">“Here is the slip and here are four letters from
            him.”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Thank you. And your address?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Mr. Angel’s address you never had, I understand. Where
            is your father’s place of business?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“<span class="male" title="hosmerAngel"> He travels for Westhouse
               &amp; Marbank, the great claret importers of Fenchurch Street</span>.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Thank you. <span class="female" title="marySutherland">You have made your statement very clearly.
               You will leave the papers here, and remember the advice</span><span class="sw-action">whichI have given you</span>. Let
            the whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affect your
            life.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="female-quote">“You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that.
            I shall be true to <span class="male" title="hosmerAngel">Hosmer. He shall
               find me ready when he comes back</span>.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <span class="female" title="marySutherland"> For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there
            was something noble in the simple faith of our visitor which compelled our respect.
            She laid her little bundle of papers upon the table and went her way, with a promise
            to come again whenever she might be summoned.</span>
         </p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertips still pressed together,
            his legs stretched out in front of him, and his gaze directed upward to the ceiling.
            Then he took down from the rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a
            counsellor, and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, with the thick blue
            cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of infinite languor in his face.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Quite an interesting study, that maiden,”</q> he
         observed. <q class="sw-quote">“I found her more interesting than her little
            problem, which, by the way, is rather a trite one. You will find parallel cases, if
            you consult my index, in Andover in ’77, and there was something of the sort at The
            Hague last year. Old as is the idea, however, there were one or two details which
            were new to me. But the maiden herself was most instructive.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“<span class="sw-action"> You appeared to read a good
               deal upon her</span> which was quite invisible to me,”</q> I remarked.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know
            where to look, and so you missed all that was important. I can never bring you to
            realise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails, or the great
            issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did you gather from that woman’s
            appearance? Describe it.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat,
            with a feather of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewn upon
            it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her dress was brown, rather darker
            than coffee colour, with a little purple plush at the neck and sleeves. Her gloves
            were greyish and were worn through at the right forefinger. Her boots I didn’t
            observe. She had small round, hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being
            fairly well-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled</span>.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“’Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully.
            You have really done very well indeed. It is true that you have missed everything
            of
            importance, but you have hit upon the method, and you have a quick eye for colour.
            Never trust to general impressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details.
            <span class="sw-action"> My first glance is always at a woman’s sleeve. In
               a man it is perhaps better first to take the knee of the trouser. As you
               observe, this woman had plush upon her sleeves, which is a most useful material
               for showing traces. The double line a little above the wrist, where the
               typewritist presses against the table, was beautifully defined. The
               sewing-machine, of the hand type, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left
               arm, and on the side of it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right
               across the broadest part, as this was. I then glanced at her face, and,
               observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I ventured a
               remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemed to surprise
               her</span>.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“It surprised me.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“But, surely, it was obvious. I was then much surprised
            and interested on glancing down to observe that, though the boots which she was
            wearing were not unlike each other, they were really odd ones; the one having a
            slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other a plain one. One was buttoned only in the
            two lower buttons out of five, and the other at the first, third, and fifth. Now,
            when you see that a young lady, otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home
            with odd boots, half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that she came away
            in
            a hurry.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“And what else?”</q> I asked, keenly interested, as I
         always was, by my friend’s incisive reasoning.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“<span class="sw-action"> I noted, in passing, that
               she had written a note before leaving home but after being fully dressed. You
               observed that her right glove was torn at the forefinger, but you did not
               apparently see that both glove and finger were stained with violet ink. She had
               written in a hurry and dipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning,
               or the mark would not remain clear upon the finger. All this is amusing, though
               rather elementary, but I must go back to business,</span> Watson. Would you
            mind reading me the advertised description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?”</q>
         </p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I held the little printed slip to the light.</span> “Missing,” it said, “on the morning of the
         fourteenth, a gentleman named Hosmer Angel. About five ft. seven in. in height; strongly
         built, sallow complexion, black hair, a little bald in the centre, bushy, black
         side-whiskers and moustache; tinted glasses, slight infirmity of speech. Was dressed,
         when last seen, in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albert
         chain,
         and grey Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaiters over elastic-sided boots. Known
         to
         have been employed in an office in Leadenhall Street. Anybody bringing,” &amp;c,
         &amp;c.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“That will do,”</q> said Holmes.<q class="sw-quote">“As to the letters,”</q> he continued, glancing over
         them, <q class="sw-quote">“they are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue in
            them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is one remarkable point,
            however, which will no doubt strike you.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“They are typewritten,”</q> I remarked.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">"Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. Look
            at the neat little ‘Hosmer Angel’ at the bottom. There is a date, you see, but no
            superscription except Leadenhall Street, which is rather vague. The point about the
            signature is very suggestive—in fact, we may call it conclusive.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Of what?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how
            strongly it bears upon the case?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“I cannot say that I do unless it were that he wished to be
            able to deny his signature if an action for breach of promise were
            instituted.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“No, that was not the point. However, <span class="sw-action">
               I shall write two letters, which should settle the matter.
               One is to a firm in the City, the other is to the young lady’s stepfather, Mr.
               Windibank, asking him whether he could meet us here at six o’clock to-morrow
               evening.</span> It is just as well that we should do business with the male
            relatives. And now, Doctor, we can do nothing until the answers to those letters
            come, so we may put our little problem upon the shelf for the interim.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend’s subtle powers of reasoning and
         extraordinary energy in action that I felt that he must have some solid grounds for
         the
         assured and easy demeanour with which he treated the singular mystery which he had
         been
         called upon to fathom. Once only had I known him to fail, in the case of the King
         of
         Bohemia and of the Irene Adler photograph; but when <span class="sw-action">I looked back to the weird business
            of the Sign of Four, and the extraordinary circumstances connected with the Study
            in
            Scarlet, I felt that it would be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel.</span></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action"> I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe</span>,
         with the conviction that when I came again on the next evening I would find that <span class="sw-action">
            he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up to the 
            identity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Sutherland</span>.</p>
      <p>A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention at the time, and
         the
         whole of next day I was busy at the bedside of the sufferer. It was not until close
         upon
         six o’clock that I found myself free and was able to spring into a hansom and drive
         to
         Baker Street, half afraid that I might be too late to assist at the dénouement of
         the
         little mystery. <span class="sw-action">I found Sherlock Holmes alone, however, half asleep, with his long, thin
            form curled up in the recesses of his armchair.</span> A formidable array of bottles and
         test-tubes, with the pungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had
         spent his day in the chemical work which was so dear to him.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Well, have you solved it?”</q> I asked as I entered.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Yes. It was the bisulphate of baryta.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“No, no, the mystery!”</q> I cried.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been
            working upon. There was never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said
            yesterday, some of the details are of interest. The only drawback is that there is
            no law, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Who was he, then, and <span class="male" title="hosmerAngel"> what was
               his object in deserting Miss Sutherland</span>?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet opened his lips to
         reply,
         when we heard a heavy footfall in the passage and a tap at the door.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“This is the girl’s stepfather, Mr. James
            Windibank,”</q> said Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">“He has written to
            me to say that he would be here at six. Come in!”</q></p>
      <p> The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirty years of age,
         clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a bland, insinuating manner, and a pair of
         wonderfully sharp and penetrating grey eyes. <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank">He shot a questioning glance at each of us,
            placed his shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled down into
            the
            nearest chair</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank,”</q> said Holmes.
         <q class="sw-quote">“I think that this typewritten letter is from you,
            in which <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank"> you made an appointment with me for six
               o’clock?</span>”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="male-quote">“Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am
            not quite my own master, you know. I am sorry that <span class="female" title="marySutherland">
               Miss Sutherland has troubled you about this little matter</span>, for I think
            it is far better not to wash linen of the sort in public. It was quite against my
            wishes that she came, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may have
            noticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made up her mind on a point.
            Of course, I did not mind you so much, as you are not connected with the official
            police, but it is not pleasant to have a family misfortune like this noised abroad.
            Besides, it is a useless expense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer
            Angel?”</q>
         </p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“On the contrary,”</q> said Holmes quietly; <q class="sw-quote">“I have every reason to believe that I will succeed in
            discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel.”</q></p>
      <p> <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank">Mr. Windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves</span>. <q class="male-quote">“I am delighted to hear it,”</q> he said.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“It is a curious thing,”</q> remarked Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">“that a typewriter has really quite as much individuality
            as a man’s handwriting. Unless they are quite new, no two of them write exactly
            alike. Some letters get more worn than others, and some wear only on one side. Now,
            you remark in this note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case there is some
            little slurring over of the ‘e,’ and a slight defect in the tail of the ‘r.’ There
            are fourteen other characteristics, but those are the more obvious.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">“We do all our correspondence with this machine at the
            office, and no doubt it is a little worn,”</q>
         <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank">our visitor answered, glancing keenly at Holmes with his
            bright little eyes</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“And now I will show you what is really a very
            interesting study, Mr. Windibank,”</q> Holmes continued. <q class="sw-quote">“I think of writing another little monograph some of these
            days on the typewriter and its relation to crime. It is a subject to which I have
            devoted some little attention. I have here four letters which purport to come from
            the missing man. They are all typewritten. In each case, not only are the ‘e’s’
            slurred and the ‘r’s’ tailless, but you will observe, if you care to use my
            magnifying lens, that the fourteen other characteristics to which I have alluded are
            there as well.”</q></p>
      <p>     <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank">Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his
            hat</span>. <q class="male-quote">“I cannot waste time over this sort of
            fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes,”</q> he said. <q class="male-quote">“If
            you can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you have done
            it.”</q></p>
      <p>     <q class="sw-quote">“Certainly,”</q> said Holmes, 
         stepping over and turning the key in the door. <q class="sw-quote">“I let you know, then, that I have caught him!”</q></p>
      <p>     <q class="male-quote">“What! where?”</q> shouted Mr. Windibank, turning
         white to his lips and glancing about him like a rat in a trap.</p>
      <p>     <q class="sw-quote">“Oh, it won’t do—really it won’t,”</q> said Holmes
         suavely. <q class="sw-quote">“There is no possible getting out of it, Mr.
            Windibank. It is quite too transparent, and it was a very bad compliment when you
            said that it was impossible for me to solve so simple a question. That’s right! Sit
            down and let us talk it over.”</q></p>
      <p>     Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a glitter of moisture
         on his
         brow. <q class="male-quote">“It—it’s not actionable,”</q> he
         stammered.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“I am very much afraid that it is not. But between
            ourselves, Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in a petty
            way as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over the course of events, and you
            will contradict me if I go wrong.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>     <span class="male" title="jamesWindibank">The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his breast, like one who is
            utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up on the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning
            back with his hands in his pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed,
            than
            to us</span>.</p>
      <p>      <q class="male-quote">“The man married a woman very much older than himself for
            her money,”</q> said he, <q class="male-quote">“and he enjoyed the use
            of the money of the daughter as long as she lived with them. It was a considerable
            sum, for people in their position, and the loss of it would have made a serious
            difference. It was worth an effort to preserve it. The daughter was of a good,
            amiable disposition, but affectionate and warm-hearted in her ways, so that it was
            evident that with her fair personal advantages, and her little income, she would not
            be allowed to remain single long. Now her marriage would mean, of course, the loss
            of a hundred a year, so what does her stepfather do to prevent it? He takes the
            obvious course of keeping her at home and forbidding her to seek the company of
            people of her own age. But soon he found that that would not answer forever. She
            became restive, insisted upon her rights, and finally announced her positive
            intention of going to a certain ball. What does her clever stepfather do then? He
            conceives an idea more creditable to his head than to his heart. With the connivance
            and assistance of his wife he disguised himself, covered those keen eyes with tinted
            glasses, masked the face with a moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that
            clear voice into an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of the girl’s
            short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off other lovers by making
            love himself.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“It was only a joke at first,”</q> groaned our
         visitor. <q class="sw-quote">“We never thought that she would have been so
            carried away.”</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady
            was very decidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind that her
            stepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery never for an instant entered
            her mind. She was flattered by the gentleman’s attentions, and the effect was
            increased by the loudly expressed admiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to
            call, for it was obvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go if
            a
            real effect were to be produced. There were meetings, and an engagement, which would
            finally secure the girl’s affections from turning towards anyone else. But the
            deception could not be kept up forever. These pretended journeys to France were
            rather cumbrous. The thing to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in such
            a dramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon the young lady’s
            mind and prevent her from looking upon any other suitor for some time to come. Hence
            those vows of fidelity exacted upon a Testament, and hence also the allusions to a
            possibility of something happening on the very morning of the wedding. James
            Windibank wished Miss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain
            as
            to his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not listen to
            another man. As far as the church door he brought her, and then, as he could go no
            farther, he conveniently vanished away by the old trick of stepping in at one door
            of a four-wheeler and out at the other. I think that was the chain of events, Mr.
            Windibank!”</q>
         </p>
      <p>Our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while Holmes had been talking,
         and
         he rose from his chair now with a cold sneer upon his pale face.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes,”</q> said
         he, <q class="sw-quote">“but if you are so very sharp you ought to be sharp
            enough to know that it is you who are breaking the law now, and not me. I have done
            nothing actionable from the first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay
            yourself open to an action for assault and illegal constraint.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“The law cannot, as you say, touch you,”</q> said
         Holmes, unlocking and throwing open the door, <q class="sw-quote">“yet there
            never was a man who deserved punishment more. If the young lady has a brother or a
            friend, he ought to lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!”</q> he
         continued, flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer upon the man’s face, <q class="sw-quote">“it is not part of my duties to my client, but here’s a
            hunting crop handy, and I think I shall just treat myself to—”</q> He took two
         swift steps to the whip, but before he could grasp it there was a wild clatter of
         steps
         upon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged, and from the window we could see Mr.
         James
         Windibank running at the top of his speed down the road.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“There’s a cold-blooded scoundrel!”</q> said Holmes,
         laughing, as he threw himself down into his chair once more. <q class="sw-quote">“That fellow will rise from crime to crime until he does
            something very bad, and ends on a gallows. The case has, in some respects, been not
            entirely devoid of interest.”</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">“I cannot now entirely see all the steps of your
            reasoning,”</q> I remarked.</p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this
            Mr. Hosmer Angel must have some strong object for his curious conduct, and it was
            equally clear that the only man who really profited by the incident, as far as we
            could see, was the stepfather. Then the fact that the two men were never together,
            but that the one always appeared when the other was away, was suggestive. So were
            the tinted spectacles and the curious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did
            the bushy whiskers. My suspicions were all confirmed by his peculiar action in
            typewriting his signature, which, of course, inferred that his handwriting was so
            familiar to her that she would recognise even the smallest sample of it. You see all
            these isolated facts, together with many minor ones, all pointed in the same
            direction.”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“And how did you verify them?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get
            corroboration. I knew the firm for which this man worked. Having taken the printed
            description. I eliminated everything from it which could be the result of a
            disguise—the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I sent it to the firm, with a
            request that they would inform me whether it answered to the description of any of
            their travellers. I had already noticed the peculiarities of the typewriter, and I
            wrote to the man himself at his business address asking him if he would come here.
            As I expected, his reply was typewritten and revealed the same trivial but
            characteristic defects. The same post brought me a letter from Westhouse &amp;
            Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the description tallied in every respect
            with that of their employé, James Windibank. Voilà tout!”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“And Miss Sutherland?”</q>
         </p>
      <p>
         <q class="sw-quote">“If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember
            the old Persian saying, ‘There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub, and
            danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.’ There is as much sense in
            Hafiz as in Horace, and as much knowledge of the world.”</q>
         </p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I had called upon my friend
            Sherlock Holmes</span> upon the second morning after Christmas,
         with the intention of wishing him the compliments of the season.
         He
         was lounging upon the sofa in a purple dressing-gown, a
         pipe-rack within his reach upon the right, and a pile of crumpled morning
         papers, evidently newly studied, near at hand. Beside the couch was a wooden
         chair, and on the angle of the back hung a very seedy and disreputable
         hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked in several places. A
         lens and a forceps lying upon the seat of the chair suggested that the hat
         had been suspended in this manner for the purpose of examination.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You are engaged,</q> said I; <q class="sw-quote">perhaps I interrupt you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom
            I can discuss my results. The matter is a perfectly trivial
            one</q>—he jerked his thumb in the direction of the old
         hat—<q class="sw-quote">but there are points in
            connection with it which are not entirely devoid of interest and
            even of instruction.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I seated myself in his
            armchair</span> and warmed my hands before his crackling fire, for
         a sharp frost had set in, and the windows were thick with the ice crystals.
         <q class="sw-quote">I suppose,</q> I remarked, <q class="sw-quote">that, homely as it looks, this thing has some
            deadly story linked on to it—that it is the clue which will guide
            you in the solution of some mystery and the punishment of some
            crime.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, no. No crime,</q> said Sherlock Holmes,
         laughing. <q class="sw-quote">Only one of those whimsical little
            incidents which will happen when you have four million human beings
            all jostling each other within the space of a few square miles. Amid
            the action and reaction of so dense a swarm of humanity, every
            possible combination of events may be expected to take place, and
            many a little problem will be presented which may be striking and
            bizarre without being criminal. We have already had experience of
            such.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">So much so,</q> I remarked, <q class="sw-quote">that of the last six cases which I have added
            to my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal
            crime.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recover
            the Irene Adler papers, to the singular case of Miss Mary
            Sutherland, and to the adventure of the man with the twisted lip.
            Well, I have no doubt that this small matter will fall into the same
            innocent category. You know Peterson, the
            commissionaire?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Yes.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is to him that this trophy
            belongs.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is his hat.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg
            that you will look upon it not as a battered billycock but as an
            intellectual problem. And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived
            upon Christmas morning, in company with a good fat goose, which is,
            I have no doubt, roasting at this moment in front of Peterson's
            fire. The facts are these: about four o'clock on Christmas morning,
            Peterson, who, as you know, is a very honest fellow, was returning
            from some small jollification and was making his way homeward down
            Tottenham Court Road. In front of him he saw, in the gaslight, a
            tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, and carrying a white
            goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached the corner of Goodge
            Street, a row broke out between this stranger and a little knot of
            roughs. One of the latter knocked off the man's hat, on which he
            raised his stick to defend himself and, swinging it over his head,
            smashed the shop window behind him. Peterson had rushed forward to
            protect the stranger from his assailants; but the man, shocked at
            having broken the window, and seeing an official-looking person in
            uniform rushing towards him, dropped his goose, took to his heels,
            and vanished amid the labyrinth of small streets which lie at the
            back of Tottenham Court Road. The roughs had also fled at the
            appearance of Peterson, so that he was left in possession of the
            field of battle, and also of the spoils of victory in the shape of
            this battered hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas
            goose.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Which surely he restored to their owner?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is
            true that 'For Mrs. Henry Baker' was printed upon a small card which
            was tied to the bird's left leg, and it is also true that the
            initials 'H. B.' are legible upon the lining of this hat, but as
            there are some thousands of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry
            Bakers in this city of ours, it is not easy to restore lost property
            to any one of them.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What, then, did Peterson do?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote"><span class="male" title="commissionairePeterson">He brought
               round both hat and goose to me on Christmas
               morning</span>, knowing that even the smallest problems are of
            interest to me. The goose we retained until this morning, when there
            were signs that, in spite of the slight frost, it would be well that
            it should be eaten without unnecessary delay. <span class="male" title="commissionairePeterson">Its
               finder has carried it off</span>,
            therefore, to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I
            continue to retain the hat of the unknown gentleman who lost his
            Christmas dinner.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Did he not advertise?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Then, what clue could you have as to his
            identity?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Only as much as we can deduce.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">From his hat?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Precisely.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">But you are joking. What can you gather from this old
            battered felt?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Here is my lens. You know my methods. What can
            you gather yourself as to the individuality of the man who has worn
            this article?</q></p>
      <p>I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather ruefully. It was
         a very ordinary black hat of the usual round shape, hard and much the worse
         for wear. The lining had been of red silk, but was a good deal discoloured.
         There was no maker's name; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials "H. B."
         were scrawled upon one side. It was pierced in the brim for a hat-securer,
         but the elastic was missing. For the rest, it was cracked, exceedingly
         dusty, and spotted in several places, although there seemed to have been
         some attempt to hide the discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I can see nothing,</q> said I, handing it back to
         my friend.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything.
            You fail, however, to reason from what you see. You are too timid in
            drawing your inferences.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from
            this hat?</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">He picked it up and
            gazed at it</span> in the peculiar introspective fashion which was
         characteristic of him. <q class="sw-quote">It is perhaps less
            suggestive than it might have been,</q> he remarked, <q class="sw-quote">and yet there are a few inferences which
            are very distinct, and a few others which represent at least a
            strong balance of probability. That the man was highly intellectual
            is of course obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was
            fairly well-to-do within the last three years, although he has now
            fallen upon evil days. He had foresight, but has less now than
            formerly, pointing to a moral retrogression, which, when taken with
            the decline of his fortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence,
            probably drink, at work upon him. This may account also for the
            obvious fact that his wife has ceased to love him.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">My dear Holmes!</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">He has, however, retained some degree of
            self-respect,</q> he continued, disregarding my remonstrance.
         <q class="sw-quote">He is a man who leads a sedentary
            life, goes out little, is out of training entirely, is middle-aged,
            has grizzled hair which he has had cut within the last few days, and
            which he anoints with lime-cream. These are the more patent facts
            which are to be deduced from his hat. Also, by the way, that it is
            extremely improbable that he has gas laid on in his
            house.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You are certainly joking, Holmes.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Not in the least. Is it possible that even now,
            when I give you these results, you are unable to see how they are
            attained?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must
            confess that I am unable to follow you. For example, how did you
            deduce that this man was intellectual?</q></p>
      <p>For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right over the forehead
         and settled upon the bridge of his nose. <q class="sw-quote">It
            is a question of cubic capacity,</q> said he; <q class="sw-quote">a man with so large a brain must have
            something in it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The decline of his fortunes, then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">This hat is three years old. These flat brims
            curled at the edge came in then. It is a hat of the very best
            quality. Look at the band of ribbed silk and the excellent lining.
            If this man could afford to buy so expensive a hat three years ago,
            and has had no hat since, then he has assuredly gone down in the
            world.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, that is clear enough, certainly. But how about
            the foresight and the moral retrogression?</q></p>
      <p>Sherlock Holmes laughed. <q class="sw-quote">Here is the
            foresight,</q> said he putting his finger upon the little disc
         and loop of the hat-securer. <q class="sw-quote">They are never
            sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of a certain
            amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to take this
            precaution against the wind. But since we see that he has broken the
            elastic and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that he
            has less foresight now than formerly, which is a distinct proof of a
            weakening nature. On the other hand, he has endeavoured to conceal
            some of these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which
            is a sign that he has not entirely lost his
            self-respect.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your reasoning is certainly plausible.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The further points, that he is middle-aged, that
            his hair is grizzled, that it has been recently cut, and that he
            uses lime-cream, are all to be gathered from a close examination of
            the lower part of the lining. The lens discloses a large number of
            hair-ends, clean cut by the scissors of the barber. They all appear
            to be adhesive, and there is a distinct odour of lime-cream. This
            dust, you will observe, is not the gritty, grey dust of the street
            but the fluffy brown dust of the house, showing that it has been
            hung up indoors most of the time, while the marks of moisture upon
            the inside are proof positive that the wearer perspired very freely,
            and could therefore, hardly be in the best of training.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">But his wife—you said that she had ceased to love
            him.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I
            see you, my dear Watson, with a week's accumulation of dust upon
            your hat, and when your wife allows you to go out in such a state, I
            shall fear that you also have been unfortunate enough to lose your
            wife's affection.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">But he might be a bachelor.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a
            peace-offering to his wife. Remember the card upon the bird's
            leg.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do
            you deduce that the gas is not laid on in his house?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">One tallow stain, or even two, might come by
            chance; but when I see no less than five, I think that there can be
            little doubt that the individual must be brought into frequent
            contact with burning tallow—walks upstairs at night probably with
            his hat in one hand and a guttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he
            never got tallow-stains from a gas-jet. Are you
            satisfied?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, it is very ingenious,</q> said I, laughing;
         <q class="sw-quote">but since, as you said just now, there
            has been no crime committed, and no harm done save the loss of a
            goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of energy.</q></p>
      <p>Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flew open, and
         <span class="male" title="commissionairePeterson">Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the
            apartment</span> with flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is
         dazed with astonishment.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose,
            sir!</q> he gasped.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and
            flapped off through the kitchen window?</q> Holmes twisted
         himself round upon the sofa to get a fairer view of the man's excited
         face.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">See here, sir! See what my wife found in
            its crop!</q>
         <span class="male" title="commissionairePeterson">He held out
            his hand and displayed</span> upon the centre of the palm a
         brilliantly scintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size,
         but of such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric point in
         the dark hollow of his hand.</p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes sat
            up</span> with a whistle. <q class="sw-quote">By Jove,
            Peterson!</q> said he, <q class="sw-quote">this is
            treasure trove indeed. I suppose you know what you have
            got?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">A diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts
            into glass as though it were putty.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It's more than a precious stone. It is _the_
            precious stone.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Not the Countess of Morcar's blue carbuncle!</q>
         I ejaculated.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape,
            seeing that I have read the advertisement about it in _The Times_
            every day lately. It is absolutely unique, and its value can only be
            conjectured, but the reward offered of £ 1000 is certainly not
            within a twentieth part of the market price.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">A thousand pounds! Great Lord of
            mercy!</q>
         <span class="male" title="commissionairePeterson">The commissionaire plumped down into a chair</span>
         and stared from one to the other of us.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">That is the reward, and I have reason to know
            that there are sentimental considerations in the background which
            would induce the Countess to part with half her fortune if she could
            but recover the gem.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It was lost, if I remember aright, at the Hotel
            Cosmopolitan,</q> I remarked.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days
            ago. John Horner, a plumber, was accused of having abstracted it
            from the lady's jewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong
            that the case has been referred to the Assizes. I have some account
            of the matter here, I believe.</q>
         <span class="sw-action">He rummaged amid
            his newspapers, glancing over the dates, until at last he smoothed
            one out,</span> doubled it over, and read the following
         paragraph:</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. John Horner,
            26, plumber, was brought up upon the charge of having upon the 22nd
            inst., abstracted from the jewel-case of the Countess of Morcar the
            valuable gem known as the blue carbuncle. James Ryder,
            upper-attendant at the hotel, gave his evidence to the effect that
            he had shown Horner up to the dressing-room of the Countess of
            Morcar upon the day of the robbery in order that he might solder the
            second bar of the grate, which was loose. He had remained with
            Horner some little time, but had finally been called away. On
            returning, he found that Horner had disappeared, that the bureau had
            been forced open, and that the small morocco casket in which, as it
            afterwards transpired, the Countess was accustomed to keep her
            jewel, was lying empty upon the dressing-table. Ryder instantly gave
            the alarm, and Horner was arrested the same evening; but the stone
            could not be found either upon his person or in his rooms. Catherine
            Cusack, maid to the Countess, deposed to having heard Ryder's cry of
            dismay on discovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the
            room, where she found matters as described by the last witness.
            Inspector Bradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrest of
            Horner, who struggled frantically, and protested his innocence in
            the strongest terms. Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery
            having been given against the prisoner, the magistrate refused to
            deal summarily with the offence, but referred it to the Assizes.
            Horner, who had shown signs of intense emotion during the
            proceedings, fainted away at the conclusion and was carried out of
            court.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Hum! So much for the police-court,</q> said
         Holmes thoughtfully, tossing aside the paper. <q class="sw-quote">The question for us now to solve is the
            sequence of events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to
            the crop of a goose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You see,
            Watson, our little deductions have suddenly assumed a much more
            important and less innocent aspect. Here is the stone; the stone
            came from the goose, and the goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, the
            gentleman with the bad hat and all the other characteristics with
            which I have bored you. So now we must set ourselves very seriously
            to finding this gentleman and ascertaining what part he has played
            in this little mystery. To do this, we must try the simplest means
            first, and these lie undoubtedly in an advertisement in all the
            evening papers. If this fail, I shall have recourse to other
            methods.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What will you say?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Give me a pencil and that slip of paper. Now,
            then: 'Found at the corner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black
            felt hat. Mr. Henry Baker can have the same by applying at 6:30 this
            evening at 221B, Baker Street.' That is clear and
            concise.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Very. But will he see it?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers,
            since, to a poor man, the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so
            scared by his mischance in breaking the window and by the approach
            of Peterson that he thought of nothing but flight, but since then he
            must have bitterly regretted the impulse which caused him to drop
            his bird. Then, again, the introduction of his name will cause him
            to see it, for everyone who knows him will direct his attention to
            it. Here you are, Peterson, run down to the advertising agency and
            have this put in the evening papers.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">In which, sir?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Oh, in the _Globe_, _Star_, _Pall Mall_, _St.
            James's Gazette_, _Evening News_, _Standard_, _Echo_, and any others
            that occur to you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Very well, sir. And this
            stone?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And,
            I say, Peterson, just buy a goose on your way back and leave it here
            with me, for we must have one to give to this gentleman in place of
            the one which your family is now devouring.</q></p>
      <p>When the commissionaire had gone, <span class="sw-action">Holmes took up the stone and
            held it against the light.</span>
         <q class="sw-quote">It's a bonny thing,</q> said he. <q class="sw-quote">Just see how it glints and sparkles. Of
            course it is a nucleus and focus of crime. Every good stone is. They
            are the devil's pet baits. In the larger and older jewels every
            facet may stand for a bloody deed. This stone is not yet twenty
            years old. It was found in the banks of the Amoy River in southern
            China and is remarkable in having every characteristic of the
            carbuncle, save that it is blue in shade instead of ruby red. In
            spite of its youth, it has already a sinister history. There have
            been two murders, a vitriol-throwing, a suicide, and several
            robberies brought about for the sake of this forty-grain weight of
            crystallised charcoal. Who would think that so pretty a toy would be
            a purveyor to the gallows and the prison? I'll lock it up in my
            strong box now and drop a line to the Countess to say that we have
            it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Do you think that this man Horner is
            innocent?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I cannot tell.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, then, do you imagine that this other one, Henry
            Baker, had anything to do with the matter?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker
            is an absolutely innocent man, who had no idea that the bird which
            he was carrying was of considerably more value than if it were made
            of solid gold. That, however, I shall determine by a very simple
            test if we have an answer to our advertisement.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And you can do nothing until then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Nothing.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">In that case I shall continue my professional round.
            But I shall come back in the evening at the hour you have mentioned,
            for I should like to see the solution of so tangled a
            business.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a
            woodcock, I believe. By the way, in view of recent occurrences,
            perhaps I ought to ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop.</q></p>
      <p>I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past six when
         <span class="sw-action">I found
            myself in Baker Street</span> once more. As <span class="sw-action">I approached the
            house</span> I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which
         was buttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the bright semicircle which
         was thrown from the fanlight. Just as I arrived the door was opened, and we
         were shown up together to Holmes' room.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Mr. Henry Baker, I believe,</q> said
         <span class="sw-action">he,
            rising from his armchair and greeting his visitor</span> with the
         easy air of geniality which he could so readily assume. <q class="sw-quote">Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr.
            Baker. It is a cold night, and I observe that your circulation is
            more adapted for summer than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just
            come at the right time. Is that your hat, Mr. Baker?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat.</q></p>
      <p>He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and a broad,
         intelligent face, sloping down to a pointed beard of grizzled brown. A touch
         of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight tremor of his extended hand,
         recalled Holmes' surmise as to his habits. His rusty black frock-coat was
         buttoned right up in front, with the collar turned up, and his lank wrists
         protruded from his sleeves without a sign of cuff or shirt. He spoke in a
         slow staccato fashion, choosing his words with care, and gave the impression
         generally of a man of learning and letters who had had ill-usage at the
         hands of fortune.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">We have retained these things for some
            days,</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">because
            we expected to see an advertisement from you giving your address. I
            am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise.</q></p>
      <p>Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. <q class="male-quote">Shillings
            have not been so plentiful with me as they once were,</q> he
         remarked. <q class="male-quote">I had no doubt that the gang of roughs
            who assaulted me had carried off both my hat and the bird. I did not
            care to spend more money in a hopeless attempt at recovering
            them.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Very naturally. By the way, about the bird, we
            were compelled to eat it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">To eat it!</q>
         <span class="male" title="henryBaker">Our visitor half rose
            from his chair</span> in his excitement.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had
            we not done so. But I presume that this other goose upon the
            sideboard, which is about the same weight and perfectly fresh, will
            answer your purpose equally well?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Oh, certainly, certainly,</q> answered Mr. Baker
         with a sigh of relief.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Of course, we still have the feathers, legs,
            crop, and so on of your own bird, so if you wish—</q></p>
      <p>The man burst into a hearty laugh. <q class="male-quote">They might be
            useful to me as relics of my adventure,</q> said he, <q class="male-quote">but beyond that I can hardly see what use the
            _disjecta membra_ of my late acquaintance are going to be to me. No,
            sir, I think that, with your permission, I will confine my
            attentions to the excellent bird which I perceive upon the
            sideboard.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes glanced
            sharply across at me</span> with a slight shrug of his
         shoulders.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">There is your hat, then, and there your
            bird,</q> said he. <q class="sw-quote">By the way,
            would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I am
            somewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a better grown
            goose.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Certainly, sir,</q> said <span class="male" title="henryBaker">Baker, who had risen
            and tucked his newly gained property under his arm</span>. <q class="male-quote">There are a few of us who frequent the Alpha
            Inn, near the Museum—we are to be found in the Museum itself during
            the day, you understand. This year our good host, Windigate by name,
            instituted a goose club, by which, on consideration of some few
            pence every week, we were each to receive a bird at Christmas. My
            pence were duly paid, and the rest is familiar to you. I am much
            indebted to you, sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fitted neither to my
            years nor my gravity.</q> With a comical pomposity of manner
         <span class="male" title="henryBaker">he
            bowed solemnly</span> to both of us and strode off upon his
         way.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">So much for Mr. Henry Baker,</q> said Holmes
         when he had closed the door behind him. <q class="sw-quote">It
            is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever about the matter.
            Are you hungry, Watson?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Not particularly.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Then I suggest that we turn our dinner into a
            supper and follow up this clue while it is still hot.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">By all means.</q></p>
      <p>It was a bitter night, so <span class="sw-action">we drew on our
            ulsters and wrapped cravats about our throats</span>. Outside, the
         stars were shining coldly in a cloudless sky, and the breath of the
         passers-by blew out into smoke like so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang
         out crisply and loudly as <span class="sw-action">we swung through
            the doctors' quarter</span>, Wimpole Street, Harley Street, and so
         through Wigmore Street into Oxford Street. In a quarter of an hour we were
         in Bloomsbury at the Alpha Inn, which is a small public-house at the corner
         of one of the streets which runs down into Holborn. <span class="sw-action">Holmes pushed
            open the door</span> of the private bar and ordered two glasses of
         beer from the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your beer should be excellent if it is as good as
            your geese,</q> said he.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">My geese!</q> The man seemed surprised.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Yes. I was speaking only half an hour ago to Mr.
            Henry Baker, who was a member of your goose club.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, them's not _our_
            geese.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Indeed! Whose, then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent
            Garden.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Indeed? I know some of them. Which was
            it?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Breckinridge is his name.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Ah! I don't know him. Well, here's your good
            health landlord, and prosperity to your house.
            Good-night.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Now for Mr. Breckinridge,</q> he continued,
         buttoning up his coat as we came out into the frosty air. <q class="sw-quote">Remember, Watson that though we have so
            homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at the
            other a man who will certainly get seven years' penal servitude
            unless we can establish his innocence. It is possible that our
            inquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line
            of investigation which has been missed by the police, and which a
            singular chance has placed in our hands. Let us follow it out to the
            bitter end. Faces to the south, then, and quick march!</q></p>
      <p>We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a zigzag of slums to
         Covent Garden Market. One of the largest stalls bore the name of
         Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor a horsey-looking man, with a sharp
         face and trim side-whiskers was helping a boy to put up the shutters.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Good-evening. It's a cold night,</q> said
         Holmes.</p>
      <p><span class="male" title="breckinridge">The salesman nodded and
            shot a questioning glance at my companion.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Sold out of geese, I see,</q> continued
         Holmes, pointing at the bare slabs of marble.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Let you have five hundred to-morrow
            morning.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">That's no good.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, there are some on the stall with the
            gas-flare.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Ah, but I was recommended to you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Who by?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The landlord of the Alpha.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Fine birds they were, too. Now where did you get
            them from?</q></p>
      <p>To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from the salesman.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Now, then, mister,</q> said he, with his head
         cocked and his arms akimbo, <q class="male-quote">what are you
            driving at? Let's have it straight, now.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is straight enough. I should like to know who
            sold you the geese which you supplied to the Alpha.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well then, I shan't tell you. So now!</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Oh, it is a matter of no importance; but I don't
            know why you should be so warm over such a trifle.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Warm! You'd be as warm, maybe, if you were as
            pestered as I am. When I pay good money for a good article there
            should be an end of the business; but it's 'Where are the geese?'
            and 'Who did you sell the geese to?' and 'What will you take for the
            geese?' One would think they were the only geese in the world, to
            hear the fuss that is made over them.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, I have no connection with any other people
            who have been making inquiries,</q> said Holmes carelessly.
         <q class="sw-quote">If you won't tell us the bet is off,
            that is all. But I'm always ready to back my opinion on a matter of
            fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate is country
            bred.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, then, you've lost your fiver, for it's town
            bred,</q> snapped the salesman.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It's nothing of the kind.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I say it is.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I don't believe it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">D'you think you know more about fowls than I, who
            have handled them ever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all those
            birds that went to the Alpha were town bred.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You'll never persuade me to believe
            that.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Will you bet, then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It's merely taking your money, for I know that I
            am right. But I'll have a sovereign on with you, just to teach you
            not to be obstinate.</q></p>
      <p>The salesman chuckled grimly. <q class="male-quote">Bring me the books,
            Bill,</q> said he.</p>
      <p><span class="male" title="bill">The small boy brought round a
            small thin volume and a great greasy-backed one</span>, laying
         them out together beneath the hanging lamp.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Now then, Mr. Cocksure,</q> said the salesman,
         <q class="male-quote">I thought that I was out of geese, but
            before I finish you'll find that there is still one left in my shop.
            You see this little book?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">That's the list of the folk from whom I buy. D'you
            see? Well, then, here on this page are the country folk, and the
            numbers after their names are where their accounts are in the big
            ledger. Now, then! You see this other page in red ink? Well, that is
            a list of my town suppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read
            it out to me.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road—249,</q>
         read Holmes.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Quite so. Now turn that up in the
            ledger.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Holmes turned to the
            page</span> indicated. <q class="sw-quote">Here you
            are, 'Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry
            supplier.'</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Now, then, what's the last entry?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">'December 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7_s_.
            6_d_.'</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Quite so. There you are. And
            underneath?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">'Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha, at
            12_s_.'</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">What have you to say now?</q></p>
      <p>Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. <span class="sw-action">He drew a sovereign from his
            pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the air of
            a man whose disgust is too deep for words</span>. A few yards off
         he stopped under a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion
         which was peculiar to him.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and
            the 'Pink 'un' protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him
            by a bet,</q> said he. <q class="sw-quote">I daresay
            that if I had put £ 100 down in front of him, that man would not
            have given me such complete information as was drawn from him by the
            idea that he was doing me on a wager. Well, Watson, we are, I fancy,
            nearing the end of our quest, and the only point which remains to be
            determined is whether we should go on to this Mrs. Oakshott
            to-night, or whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It is clear
            from what that surly fellow said that there are others besides
            ourselves who are anxious about the matter, and I
            should—</q></p>
      <p>His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke out from the
         stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a little rat-faced fellow
         standing in the centre of the circle of yellow light which was thrown by the
         swinging lamp, while <span class="male" title="breckinridge">Breckinridge, the salesman, framed in the door of
            his stall, was shaking his fists</span> fiercely at the cringing
         figure.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I've had enough of you and your geese,</q> he
         shouted. <q class="male-quote">I wish you were all at the devil
            together. If you come pestering me any more with your silly talk
            I'll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott here and I'll
            answer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geese off
            you?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">No; but one of them was mine all the same,</q>
         whined the little man.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">She told me to ask you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I
            care. I've had enough of it. Get out of this!</q> He rushed
         fiercely forward, and the inquirer flitted away into the darkness.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Ha! this may save us a visit to Brixton
            Road,</q> whispered Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">Come
            with me, and we will see what is to be made of this fellow.</q>
         Striding through the scattered knots of people who lounged round the flaring
         stalls, <span class="sw-action">my
            companion speedily overtook the little man</span>
         and touched him upon the shoulder. He sprang round, and I could see in the
         gas-light that every vestige of colour had been driven from his face.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Who are you, then? What do you want?</q> he asked
         in a quavering voice.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You will excuse me,</q> said Holmes blandly,
         <q class="sw-quote">but I could not help overhearing the
            questions which you put to the salesman just now. I think that I
            could be of assistance to you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">You? Who are you? How could you know anything of the
            matter?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">My name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to
            know what other people don't know.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">But you can know nothing of this?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are
            endeavouring to trace some geese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott,
            of Brixton Road, to a salesman named Breckinridge, by him in turn to
            Mr. Windigate, of the Alpha, and by him to his club, of which Mr.
            Henry Baker is a member.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to
            meet,</q> cried the little fellow with outstretched hands and
         quivering fingers. <q class="male-quote">I can hardly explain to you
            how interested I am in this matter.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes hailed a
            four-wheeler</span> which was passing. <q class="sw-quote">In that case we had better discuss it in a
            cosy room rather than in this wind-swept market-place,</q> said
         he. <q class="sw-quote">But pray tell me, before we go farther,
            who it is that I have the pleasure of assisting.</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="jamesRyder">The man hesitated for an
            instant</span>. <q class="male-quote">My name is John
            Robinson,</q> he answered with a sidelong glance.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, no; the real name,</q> said Holmes
         sweetly. <q class="sw-quote">It is always awkward doing business
            with an alias.</q></p>
      <p>A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. <q class="male-quote">Well then,</q> said he, <q class="male-quote">my real
            name is James Ryder.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel
            Cosmopolitan. Pray step into the cab, and I shall soon be able to
            tell you everything which you would wish to know.</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="jamesRyder">The little man stood
            glancing from one to the other of us with half-frightened,
            half-hopeful eyes</span>, as one who is not sure whether he is on
         the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe. Then <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">he stepped into the
            cab</span>, and in half an hour we were back in the sitting-room
         at Baker Street. Nothing had been said during our drive, but the high, thin
         breathing of our new companion, and the claspings and unclaspings of his
         hands, spoke of the nervous tension within him.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Here we are!</q> said Holmes cheerily as we
         filed into the room. <q class="sw-quote">The fire looks very
            seasonable in this weather. You look cold, Mr. Ryder. Pray take the
            basket-chair. I will just put on my slippers before we settle this
            little matter of yours. Now, then! You want to know what became of
            those geese?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes, sir.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one
            bird, I imagine in which you were interested—white, with a black bar
            across the tail.</q></p>
      <p>Ryder quivered with emotion. <q class="male-quote">Oh, sir,</q> he
         cried, <q class="male-quote">can you tell me where it went
            to?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It came here.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Here?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I
            don't wonder that you should take an interest in it. It laid an egg
            after it was dead—the bonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever
            was seen. I have it here in my museum.</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="jamesRyder">Our visitor staggered to his
            feet and clutched the mantelpiece with his right hand</span>.
         <span class="sw-action">Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held up the blue
            carbuncle</span>, which shone out like a star, with a cold,
         brilliant, many-pointed radiance. <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">Ryder stood glaring</span> with a
         drawn face, uncertain whether to claim or to disown it.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The game's up, Ryder,</q> said Holmes
         quietly. <q class="sw-quote">Hold up, man, or you'll be into the
            fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson. He's not got
            blood enough to go in for felony with impunity. Give him a dash of
            brandy. So! Now he looks a little more human. What a shrimp it is,
            to be sure!</q></p>
      <p>For a moment <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">he had
            staggered and nearly fallen</span>, but the brandy brought a tinge
         of colour into his cheeks, and <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">he sat staring</span> with frightened eyes at his
         accuser.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I have almost every link in my hands, and all the
            proofs which I could possibly need, so there is little which you
            need tell me. Still, that little may as well be cleared up to make
            the case complete. You had heard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the
            Countess of Morcar's?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">It was Catherine Cusack who told me of it,</q>
         said he in a crackling voice.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I see—her ladyship's waiting-maid. Well, the
            temptation of sudden wealth so easily acquired was too much for you,
            as it has been for better men before you; but you were not very
            scrupulous in the means you used. It seems to me, Ryder, that there
            is the making of a very pretty villain in you. You knew that this
            man Horner, the plumber, had been concerned in some such matter
            before, and that suspicion would rest the more readily upon him.
            What did you do, then? <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">You made some small job</span> in my
            lady's room—you and your confederate Cusack—and <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">you managed
               that he should be the man sent for</span>. Then, when he
            had left, <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">you
               rifled the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this
               unfortunate man arrested</span>. You then—</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="jamesRyder">Ryder threw himself down
            suddenly upon the rug and clutched at my companion's knees</span>.
         <q class="male-quote">For God's sake, have mercy!</q> he
         shrieked. <q class="male-quote">Think of my father! Of my mother! It
            would break their hearts. I never went wrong before! I never will
            again. I swear it. I'll swear it on a Bible. Oh, don't bring it into
            court! For Christ's sake, don't!</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Get back into your chair!</q> said Holmes
         sternly. <q class="sw-quote">It is very well to cringe and crawl
            now, but you thought little enough of this poor Horner in the dock
            for a crime of which he knew nothing.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country,
            sir. Then the charge against him will break down.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear
            a true account of the next act. How came the stone into the goose,
            and how came the goose into the open market? Tell us the truth, for
            there lies your only hope of safety.</q></p>
      <p>Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips. <q class="male-quote">I will
            tell you it just as it happened, sir,</q> said he. <q class="male-quote">When Horner had been arrested, it seemed to me
            that it would be best for me to get away with the stone at once, for
            I did not know at what moment the police might not take it into
            their heads to search me and my room. There was no place about the
            hotel where it would be safe. <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I went out, as if on some
               commission</span>, and <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I made for my sister's
               house</span>. She had married a man named Oakshott, and
            lived in Brixton Road, where she fattened fowls for the market. All
            the way there every man I met seemed to me to be a policeman or a
            detective; and, for all that it was a cold night, the sweat was
            pouring down my face before I came to the Brixton Road. My sister
            asked me what was the matter, and why I was so pale; but I told her
            that I had been upset by the jewel robbery at the hotel. Then
            <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I went into the back yard and smoked a
               pipe</span> and wondered what it would be best to
            do.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the
            bad, and has just been serving his time in Pentonville. One day he
            had met me, and fell into talk about the ways of thieves, and how
            they could get rid of what they stole. I knew that he would be true
            to me, for I knew one or two things about him; so I made up my mind
            to go right on to Kilburn, where he lived, and take him into my
            confidence. He would show me how to turn the stone into money. But
            how to get to him in safety? <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I thought of the agonies I
               had gone through in coming from the hotel</span>. I might
            at any moment be seized and searched, and there would be the stone
            in my waistcoat pocket. <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I was leaning against the
               wall</span> at the time and looking at the geese which
            were waddling about round my feet, and suddenly an idea came into my
            head which showed me how I could beat the best detective that ever
            lived.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">My sister had told me some weeks before that I might
            have the pick of her geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that
            she was always as good as her word. <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I would take my
               goose</span> now, and in it I would carry my stone to
            Kilburn. There was a little shed in the yard, and behind this
            <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I drove one of the birds</span>—a fine big
            one, white, with a barred tail. <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I caught it</span>, and
            prying its bill open, <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I thrust the stone down its throat</span>
            as far as my finger could reach. The bird gave a gulp, and I felt
            the stone pass along its gullet and down into its crop. But the
            creature flapped and struggled, and out came my sister to know what
            was the matter. As I turned to speak to her the brute broke loose
            and fluttered off among the others.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="female-quote">Whatever were you doing
               with that bird, Jem?</q><br/> says she. <q class="male-quote">Well,</q><br/> said I, <q class="male-quote">you said you'd give me one for
               Christmas, and I was feeling which was the fattest.</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Oh,</q><br/> says she, <q class="female-quote">we've set yours aside for you—Jem's
               bird, we call it. It's the big white one over yonder.
               There's twenty-six of them, which makes one for you, and one
               for us, and two dozen for the market.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Thank you, Maggie,</q><br/> says I; <q class="male-quote">but if it is all the same to you, I'd
               rather have that one I was handling just now.</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">The other is a good three pound
               heavier,</q><br/> said she, <q class="female-quote">and we
               fattened it expressly for you.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">Never mind. I'll have the other, and I'll
               take it now,</q><br/> said I. <q class="female-quote">Oh,
               just as you like,</q><br/> said she, a little huffed. <q class="female-quote">Which is it you want, then?</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">That white one with the barred tail,
               right in the middle of the flock.</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Oh, very well. Kill it and take it with
               you.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I did what she said</span>, Mr. Holmes,
            and <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I carried
               the bird all the way to Kilburn</span>. <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I told my pal what
               I had done</span>, for he was a man that it was easy to tell a thing like
            that to. He laughed until he choked, and we got a knife and opened
            the goose. My heart turned to water, for there was no sign of the
            stone, and I knew that some terrible mistake had occurred. <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I left
               the bird, rushed back to my sister's, and hurried into the back
               yard.</span> There was not a bird to be seen there.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Where are they all,
               Maggie?</q><br/> I cried. <q class="female-quote">Gone to
               the dealer</q><br/>s, Jem.' <q class="male-quote">Which
               dealer's?</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.</q><br/>
            <q class="male-quote">But was there another with a barred
               tail?</q><br/> I asked, <q class="male-quote">the same as
               the one I chose?</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Yes, Jem; there were two barred-tailed
               ones, and I could never tell them apart.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Well, then, of course I saw it all, and <span class="male" title="jamesRyder">I ran off as
               hard as my feet would carry me</span> to this man Breckinridge; but he had
            sold the lot at once, and not one word would he tell me as to where
            they had gone. You heard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has
            always answered me like that. My sister thinks that I am going mad.
            Sometimes I think that I am myself. And now—and now I am myself a
            branded thief, without ever having touched the wealth for which I
            sold my character. God help me! God help me!</q> He burst into
         convulsive sobbing, with his face buried in his hands.</p>
      <p>There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing and by the measured
         tapping of Sherlock Holmes' finger-tips upon the edge of the table. Then my
         friend rose and threw open the door.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Get out!</q> said he.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">What, sir! Oh, Heaven bless you!</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No more words. Get out!</q></p>
      <p>And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon the stairs, the
         bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running footfalls from the
         street.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">After all, Watson,</q> said Holmes, reaching
         up his hand for his clay pipe, <q class="sw-quote">I am not
            retained by the police to supply their deficiencies. If Horner were
            in danger it would be another thing; but this fellow will not appear
            against him, and the case must collapse. I suppose that I am
            commuting a felony, but it is just possible that I am saving a soul.
            This fellow will not go wrong again; he is too terribly frightened.
            Send him to gaol now, and you make him a gaol-bird for life.
            Besides, it is the season of forgiveness. Chance has put in our way
            a most singular and whimsical problem, and its solution is its own
            reward. If you will have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctor, we
            will begin another investigation, in which, also a bird will be the
            chief feature.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Holmes,</q> said I as <span class="sw-action">I stood one morning in our
            bow-window looking down the street</span>, <q class="sw-quote">here is a
            madman coming along. It seems rather sad that his relatives should
            allow him to come out alone.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">My friend rose lazily from his armchair and stood with his hands in the pockets
            of his dressing-gown, looking over my shoulder</span>. It was a bright, crisp
         February morning, and the snow of the day before still lay deep upon the
         ground, shimmering brightly in the wintry sun. Down the centre of Baker
         Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumbly band by the traffic, but at
         either side and on the heaped-up edges of the footpaths it still lay as
         white as when it fell. The grey pavement had been cleaned and scraped, but
         was still dangerously slippery, so that there were fewer passengers than
         usual. Indeed, from the direction of the Metropolitan Station no one was
         coming save the single gentleman whose eccentric conduct had drawn my
         attention.</p>
      <p>He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly, and imposing, with a massive, strongly
         marked face and a commanding figure. He was dressed in a sombre yet rich
         style, in black frock-coat, shining hat, neat brown gaiters, and well-cut
         pearl-grey trousers. Yet his actions were in absurd contrast to the dignity
         of his dress and features, for he was running hard, with occasional little
         springs, such as a weary man gives who is little accustomed to set any tax
         upon his legs. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">As he ran he jerked his hands up and down, waggled his head,
            and writhed his face into the most extraordinary contortions.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What on earth can be the matter with him?</q> I
         asked. <q class="sw-quote"><span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">He is looking up at the numbers of the
               houses.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I believe that he is coming here,</q> said
         <span class="sw-action">Holmes, rubbing his
            hands</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Here?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Yes; I rather think he is coming to consult me
            professionally. I think that I recognise the symptoms. Ha! did I not
            tell you?</q> <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">As he spoke, the man, puffing and blowing, rushed
            at our door and pulled at our bell until the whole house resounded with the
            clanging.</span></p>
      <p>A few moments later <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">he was in our room, still puffing, still gesticulating</span>, but
         with so fixed a look of grief and despair in his eyes that our smiles were
         turned in an instant to horror and pity. For a while <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">he could not get his
            words out, but swayed his body and plucked at his hair like one who has been
            driven to the extreme limits of his reason</span>. Then, <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">suddenly springing to his
            feet, he beat his head against the wall with such force</span> that <span class="male" title="johnWatson, sherlockHolmes">we both rushed
            upon him and tore him away to the centre of the room</span>. Sherlock <span class="sw-action">Holmes pushed him down into the
            easy-chair and, sitting beside him, patted his hand and chatted with
            him in the easy, soothing tones which he knew so well how to
            employ</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You have come to me to tell your story, have you
            not?</q> said he. <q class="sw-quote">You are
            fatigued with your haste. Pray wait until you have recovered
            yourself, and then I shall be most happy to look into any little
            problem which you may submit to me.</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">The man sat for a minute or more with a heaving chest, fighting against his
            emotion. Then he passed his handkerchief over his brow, set his lips tight,
            and turned his face towards us.</span></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">No doubt you think me mad?</q> said he.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I see that you have had some great
            trouble,</q> responded Holmes.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">God knows I have!—a trouble which is enough to
            unseat my reason, so sudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I
            might have faced, although I am a man whose character has never yet
            borne a stain. Private affliction also is the lot of every man; but
            the two coming together, and in so frightful a form, have been
            enough to shake my very soul. Besides, it is not I alone. The very
            noblest in the land may suffer unless some way be found out of this
            horrible affair.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Pray compose yourself, sir,</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">and let
            me have a clear account of who you are and what it is that has
            befallen you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">My name,</q> answered our visitor, <q class="male-quote">is probably familiar to your ears. I am
            Alexander Holder, of the banking
            firm of Holder &amp; Stevenson, of Threadneedle Street.</q></p>
      <p>The name was indeed well known to us as belonging to the senior partner in the
         second largest private banking concern in the City of London. What could
         have happened, then, to bring one of the foremost citizens of London to this
         most pitiable pass? <span class="sw-action">We waited, all curiosity</span>, until with another effort he
         braced himself to tell his story.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I feel that time is of value,</q> said he;
         <q class="male-quote">that is why I hastened here when
            the police inspector suggested that I should secure your
            co-operation. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I came to Baker Street by the Underground and hurried
               from there on foot</span>, for the cabs go slowly through this snow. That
            is why I was so out of breath, for I am a man who takes very little
            exercise. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I feel better now, and I will put the facts before you as
               shortly and yet as clearly as I can</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">It is, of course, well known to you that in a
            successful banking business as much depends upon our being able to
            find remunerative investments for our funds as upon our increasing
            our connection and the number of our depositors. One of our most
            lucrative means of laying out money is in the shape of loans, where
            the security is unimpeachable. We have done a good deal in this
            direction during the last few years, and there are many noble
            families to whom we have advanced large sums upon the security of
            their pictures, libraries, or plate.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yesterday morning <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I was seated in my office at
               the bank when a card was brought in to me by one of the clerks. </span>I
            started when I saw the name, for it was that of none other
            than—well, perhaps even to you I had better say no more than that it
            was a name which is a household word all over the earth—one of the
            highest, noblest, most exalted names in England. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I was overwhelmed
               by the honour and attempted, when he entered</span>, to say so, but <span class="male" title="Clerk">he
               plunged at once into business with the air of a man who wishes to
               hurry quickly through a disagreeable task.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Mr.
               Holder,</q><br/> said he, <q class="male-quote">I have been informed that you are in the habit of advancing
               money.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">The firm does so
               when the security is good.</q> I answered.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">It is absolutely essential
               to me,</q><br/> said he, <q class="male-quote">that I should
               have £ 50,000 at once. I could, of course, borrow so
               trifling a sum ten times over from my friends, but I much
               prefer to make it a matter of business and to carry out that
               business myself. In my position you can readily understand
               that it is unwise to place one’s self under
               obligations.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">For how long,
               may I ask, do you want this sum?</q> I asked.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Next Monday I have a large
               sum due to me, and I shall then most certainly repay what
               you advance, with whatever interest you think it right to
               charge. But it is very essential to me that the money should
               be paid at once.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">I should be
               happy to advance it without further parley from my own
               private purse,</q><br/> said I, <q class="male-quote"> were it not that the strain would
               be rather more than it could bear. If, on the other hand, I
               am to do it in the name of the firm, then in justice to my
               partner I must insist that, even in your case, every
               businesslike precaution should be taken.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">I should much prefer to
               have it so,</q><br/> said he, raising up a square, black
            morocco case which he had laid beside his chair. <q class="male-quote">You have doubtless heard of the Beryl
               Coronet?</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">One of the most
               precious public possessions of the empire,</q> said
            I.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Precisely.</q><br/> <span class="male" title="Clerk">He
               opened the case</span>, and there, imbedded in soft, flesh-coloured velvet,
            lay the magnificent piece of jewellery which he had named. <q class="male-quote">There are thirty-nine enormous
               beryls,</q><br/> said he, <q class="male-quote">and the price
               of the gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimate
               would put the worth of the coronet at double the sum which I
               have asked. I am prepared to leave it with you as my
               security.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I took the precious case into my hands and
               looked in some perplexity from it to my illustrious
               client.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">You doubt its
               value?</q> he asked.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Not at all. I
               only doubt—</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">The propriety of my
               leaving it. You may set your mind at rest about that. I
               should not dream of doing so were it not absolutely certain
               that I should be able in four days to reclaim it. It is a
               pure matter of form. Is the security
               sufficient?</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Ample.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">You understand, Mr. Holder, that <span class="male" title="Clerk">I am giving
                  you a strong proof of the confidence which I have in you</span>,
               founded upon all that I have heard of you. I rely upon you
               not only to be discreet and to refrain from all gossip upon
               the matter but, above all, to preserve this coronet with
               every possible precaution because I need not say that a
               great public scandal would be caused if any harm were to
               befall it. Any injury to it would be almost as serious as
               its complete loss, for there are no beryls in the world to
               match these, and it would be impossible to replace them. <span class="male" title="Clerk">I
                  leave it with you, however, with every confidence, and I
                  shall call for it in person on Monday
                  morning.</span></q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Seeing that my client was anxious to leave, I
            said no more but, <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">calling for my cashier, I ordered him to pay over
               fifty £ 1000 notes</span>. When I was alone once more, however, with the
            precious case lying upon the table in front of me, I could not but
            think with some misgivings of the immense responsibility which it
            entailed upon me. There could be no doubt that, as it was a national
            possession, a horrible scandal would ensue if any misfortune should
            occur to it. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I already regretted having ever consented to take
               charge of it</span>. However, it was too late to alter the matter now, so <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I
               locked it up in my private safe and turned once more to my
               work</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">When evening came I felt that it would be an
            imprudence to leave so precious a thing in the office behind me.
            Bankers’ safes had been forced before now, and why should not mine
            be? If so, how terrible would be the position in which I should find
            myself! <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I determined, therefore, that for the next few days I would
               always carry the case backward and forward with me</span>, so that it might
            never be really out of my reach. With this intention, <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I called a cab
               and drove out to my house at Streatham, carrying the jewel with me.
               I did not breathe freely until I had taken it upstairs and locked it
               in the bureau of my dressing-room.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">And now a word as to my household, Mr. Holmes, for <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I wish you to thoroughly
               understand the situation</span>. My groom and my page sleep out of the
            house, and may be set aside altogether. I have three maid-servants
            who have been with me a number of years and whose absolute
            reliability is quite above suspicion. Another, Lucy Parr, the second
            waiting-maid, has only been in my service a few months. <span class="female" title="lucyParr">She came
               with an excellent character</span>, however, and has always given me
            satisfaction. She is a very pretty girl and has attracted admirers
            who have occasionally hung about the place. That is the only
            drawback which we have found to her, but we believe her to be a
            thoroughly good girl in every way.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">So much for the servants. My family itself is so
            small that it will not take me long to describe it. I am a widower
            and have an only son, Arthur. He has been
            a disappointment to me, Mr. Holmes—a
            grievous disappointment. I have no doubt that I am myself to blame.
            People tell me that <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I have spoiled him.</span> Very likely I have. When my
            dear wife died <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I felt that he was all I had to love</span>. I could not
            bear to see the smile fade even for a moment from his face. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I have
               never denied him a wish</span>. Perhaps it would have been better for both
            of us had I been sterner, but I meant it for the best.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">It was naturally my intention that he should
            succeed me in my business, but he was not of a business turn. He was
            wild, wayward, and, to speak the truth, I could not trust him in the
            handling of large sums of money. When he was young <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">he became a
               member of an aristocratic club</span>, and there, having charming manners,
            he was soon the intimate of a number of men with long purses and
            expensive habits. <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">He learned to play heavily at cards and to
               squander money on the turf</span>, until he had again and again to come to
            me and implore me to give him an advance upon his allowance, that he
            might settle his debts of honour. <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">He tried more than once to break
               away from the dangerous company</span> which he was keeping, but each time
            the influence of his friend, Sir George Burnwell, was enough to draw
            him back again.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">And, indeed, I could not wonder that such a man
            as Sir George Burnwell should gain an influence over him, for <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">he
               has frequently brought him to my house</span>, and <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I have found myself that
               I could hardly resist the fascination of his manner</span>. He is older
            than Arthur, a man of the world to his
            finger-tips, one who had been everywhere, seen everything, a
            brilliant talker, and a man of great personal beauty. Yet when I
            think of him in cold blood, far away from the glamour of his
            presence, I am convinced from his cynical speech and the look which
            I have caught in his eyes that he is one who should be deeply
            distrusted. So I think, and so, too, thinks my little Mary, who has a
            woman’s quick insight into character.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">And now there is only she to be described. She
            is my niece; but when my brother died five years ago and left her
            alone in the world <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I adopted her, and have looked upon her ever
               since as my daughter</span>. She is a sunbeam in my house—sweet, loving,
            beautiful, a wonderful manager and housekeeper, yet as tender and
            quiet and gentle as a woman could be. She is my right hand. I do not
            know what I could do without her. In only one matter has she ever
            gone against my wishes. Twice my boy has asked her to marry him, for
            he loves her devotedly, but each time she has refused him. I think
            that if anyone could have drawn him into the right path it would
            have been she, and that his marriage might have changed his whole
            life; but now, alas! it is too late—forever too late!</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who
            live under my roof, and I shall continue with my miserable
            story.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">When we were taking coffee in the drawing-room
            that night after dinner, I told Arthur and Mary my experience, and of the
            precious treasure which we had under our roof, suppressing only the
            name of my client. <span class="female" title="lucyParr">Lucy Parr, who had brought in the coffee, had, I
               am sure, left the room</span>; but I cannot swear that the door was closed.
            Mary and
            Arthur were
            much interested and wished to see the famous coronet, but I thought
            it better not to disturb it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Where have you put
               it?</q> asked 
            Arthur.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">In my own
               bureau.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Well, I hope to goodness
               the house won’t be burgled during the night.</q> said
            he.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">It is locked
               up,</q> I answered.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Oh, any old key will fit
               that bureau. When I was a youngster I have opened it myself
               with the key of the box-room cupboard.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">He often had a wild way of talking, so that I
            thought little of what he said. <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">He followed me to my room, however,
               that night with a very grave face</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Look here, dad,</q><br/>
            said he with his eyes cast down, <q class="male-quote">can you let
               me have £ 200?</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">No, I
               cannot!</q><br/> I answered sharply. <q class="male-quote">I have been far too generous with
               you in money matters.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">You have been very
               kind,</q><br/> said he, <q class="male-quote">but I must have
               this money, or else I can never show my face inside the club
               again.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">And a very good
               thing, too!</q> I cried.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Yes, but you would not
               have me leave it a dishonoured man,</q><br/> said he. <q class="male-quote">I could not bear the disgrace. I must raise
               the money in some way, and if you will not let me have it,
               then I must try other means.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I was very angry, for this was the third demand
            during the month. <q class="male-quote">You shall not have
               a farthing from me,</q> I cried, on which <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">he bowed and
               left the room without another word</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">When he was gone <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I unlocked my bureau, made sure
               that my treasure was safe, and locked it again</span>. Then <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I started to go
               round the house to see that all was secure—a duty</span> which I usually
            leave to Mary but
            which I thought it well to perform myself that night. As I came down
            the stairs I saw Mary herself at the side window of the hall, which
            <span class="female" title="maryHolder">she closed and fastened as I approached</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="female-quote">Tell me,
               dad,</q><br/> said she, looking, I thought, a little
            disturbed, <q class="female-quote">did you give Lucy, the maid,
               leave to go out to-night?</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Certainly
               not.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="female-quote"><span class="female" title="lucyParr">She came in just
                  now by the back door</span>. I have no doubt that she has only been
               to the side gate to see someone, but I think that it is
               hardly safe and should be stopped.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">You must speak
               to her in the morning, or I will if you prefer it. Are you
               sure that everything is fastened?</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="female-quote">Quite sure,
               dad.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Then,
               good-night.</q> <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I kissed her and went up to my bedroom
               again</span>, where I was soon asleep.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I am endeavouring to tell you everything, Mr.
            Holmes, which may have any
            bearing upon the case, but <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I beg that you will question me upon any
               point which I do not make clear</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">On the contrary, your statement is singularly
            lucid.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I come to a part of my story now in which I
               should wish to be particularly so</span>. I am not a very heavy sleeper,
            and the anxiety in my mind tended, no doubt, to make me even less so
            than usual. About two in the morning, then, <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I was awakened by some
               sound in the house</span>. It had ceased ere I was wide awake, but it had
            left an impression behind it as though a window had gently closed
            somewhere. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder"> lay listening with all my ears</span>. Suddenly, to my horror,
            there was a distinct sound of footsteps moving softly in the next
            room. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I slipped out of bed, all palpitating with fear, and peeped
               round the corner of my dressing-room door</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Arthur!</q><br/> I screamed, <q class="male-quote">you villain! you thief! How dare
               you touch that coronet?</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my
            unhappy boy, dressed only in his shirt and trousers, was standing
            beside the light, holding the coronet in his hands. <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">He appeared to
               be wrenching at it, or bending it with all his strength</span>. At my cry
            <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">he dropped it from his grasp and turned as pale as death</span>. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I snatched
               it up and examined it</span>. One of the gold corners, with three of the
            beryls in it, was missing.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">You
               blackguard!</q><br/> I shouted, beside myself with rage. <q class="male-quote">You have destroyed it! You have
               dishonoured me forever! Where are the jewels which you have
               stolen?</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Stolen!</q> he
            cried.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Yes,
               thief!</q> I roared, shaking him by the
            shoulder.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">There are none missing.
               There cannot be any missing,</q> said he.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">There are three
               missing. And you know where they are. Must I call you a liar
               as well as a thief? Did I not see you trying to tear off
               another piece?</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">You have called me names
               enough,</q><br/> said he, <q class="male-quote">I will not
               stand it any longer. I shall not say another word about this
               business, since you have chosen to insult me. I will leave
               your house in the morning and make my own way in the
               world.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">You shall leave
               it in the hands of the police!</q><br/> I cried half-mad with
            grief and rage. <q class="male-quote">I shall have this
               matter probed to the bottom.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">You shall learn nothing
               from me,</q><br/> said he with a passion such as I should not
            have thought was in his nature. <q class="male-quote">If you choose
               to call the police, let the police find what they
               can.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">By this time the whole house was astir, for <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I
               had raised my voice in my anger</span>. <span class="female" title="maryHolder">Mary was the first to
               rush into my room</span>, and, at the sight of the coronet
            and of Arthur’s
            face, <span class="female" title="maryHolder">she read the whole story and, with a scream, fell down
               senseless on the ground</span>. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I sent the housemaid for the police and put
               the investigation into their hands at once</span>. When the inspector and a
            constable entered the house, <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">
               Arthur, who had stood sullenly with his arms
               folded, asked me whether it was my intention to charge him
               with theft</span>. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I answered that it had ceased to be a
               private matter</span>, but had become a public one, since the ruined
            coronet was national property. I was determined that the law should
            have its way in everything.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">At least,</q><br/> said he,
            <q class="male-quote">you will not have me arrested at
               once. It would be to your advantage as well as mine if I
               might leave the house for five minutes.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">That you may get
               away, or perhaps that you may conceal what you have
               stolen,</q> said I. And then, realising the dreadful
            position in which I was placed, <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I implored him to remember that not
               only my honour but that of one who was far greater than I was at
               stake</span>; and that he threatened to raise a scandal which would
            convulse the nation. He might avert it all if he would but tell me
            what he had done with the three missing stones.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">You may as well
               face the matter,</q><br/> said I; <q class="male-quote">you have been caught in the act,
               and no confession could make your guilt more heinous. If you
               but make such reparation as is in your power, by telling us
               where the beryls are, all shall be forgiven and
               forgotten.</q></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><q class="male-quote">Keep your forgiveness for
               those who ask for it,</q> <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">he answered, turning away from
               me with a sneer</span>. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I saw that he was too hardened for any words of
               mine to influence him</span>. There was but one way for it. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I called in the
               inspector and gave him into custody</span>. A search was made at once not
            only of his person but of his room and of every portion of the house
            where he could possibly have concealed the gems; but no trace of
            them could be found, nor would the wretched boy open his mouth for
            all our persuasions and our threats. This morning he was removed to
            a cell, and I, after going through all the police formalities, have
            hurried round to you to implore you to use your skill in unravelling
            the matter. The police have openly confessed that they can at
            present make nothing of it. You may go to any expense which you
            think necessary. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I have already offered a reward of £ 1000</span>. My God,
            what shall I do! I have lost my honour, my gems, and my son in one
            night. Oh, what shall I do!</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">He put a hand on either side of his head and rocked himself to and fro, droning
            to himself like a child whose grief has got beyond words.</span></p>
      <p>Sherlock <span class="sw-action">Holmes sat
            silent for some few minutes, with his brows knitted and his eyes
            fixed upon the fire</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Do you receive much company?</q> he
         asked.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">None save my partner with his family and an
            occasional friend of Arthur’s. Sir George 
            Burnwell has been several times lately. No one else,
            I think.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Do you go out much in society?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Arthur does. Mary and I
            stay at home. We neither of us care for it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">That is unusual in a young girl.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">She is of a quiet nature. Besides, she is not
            so very young. She is four-and-twenty.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">This matter, from what you say, seems to have
            been a shock to her also.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Terrible! She is even more affected than
            I.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You have neither of you any doubt as to your
            son’s guilt?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">How can we have when I saw him with my own eyes
            with the coronet in his hands.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I hardly consider that a conclusive proof. Was
            the remainder of the coronet at all injured?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes, it was twisted.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Do you not think, then, that he might have been
            trying to straighten it?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">God bless you! You are doing what you can for
            him and for me. But it is too heavy a task. What was he doing there
            at all? If his purpose were innocent, why did he not say
            so?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not
            invent a lie? His silence appears to me to cut both ways. There are
            several singular points about the case. What did the police think of
            the noise which awoke you from your sleep?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">They considered that it might be caused by
            <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">Arthur’s closing
               his bedroom door.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would
            slam his door so as to wake a household. What did they say, then, of
            the disappearance of these gems?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">They are still sounding the planking and probing
            the furniture in the hope of finding them.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Have they thought of looking outside the
            house?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy. The
            whole garden has already been minutely examined.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Now, my dear sir,</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">is it not obvious to you now that this
            matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or the police
            were at first inclined to think? It appeared to you to be a simple
            case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what is involved
            by your theory. You suppose that your son came down from his bed,
            went, at great risk, to your dressing-room, opened your bureau, took
            out your coronet, broke off by main force a small portion of it,
            went off to some other place, concealed three gems out of the
            thirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and then
            returned with the other thirty-six into the room in which he exposed
            himself to the greatest danger of being discovered. I ask you now,
            is such a theory tenable?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">But what other is there?</q> cried the banker with a gesture of despair. <q class="male-quote">If his motives were innocent, why does he
            not explain them?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is our task to find that out,</q> replied
         Holmes; <q class="sw-quote">so now, if you please, Mr. Holder, we
            will set off for Streatham together, and devote an hour to glancing
            a little more closely into details.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">My friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition</span>, which I was
         eager enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy were deeply stirred by the
         story to which we had listened. I confess that the guilt of the banker’s son
         appeared to me to be as obvious as it did to his unhappy father, but still I
         had such faith in Holmes’
         judgment that I felt that there must be some grounds for hope as long as he
         was dissatisfied with the accepted explanation. <span class="sw-action">He hardly spoke a word the
            whole way out to the southern suburb, but sat with his chin upon his breast
            and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the deepest thought</span>. Our client
         appeared to have taken fresh heart at the little glimpse of hope which had
         been presented to him, and <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">he even broke into a desultory chat with me over
            his business affairs</span>. A short railway journey and a shorter walk brought us
         to Fairbank, the modest residence of the great financier.</p>
      <p>Fairbank was a good-sized square house of white stone, standing back a little
         from the road. A double carriage-sweep, with a snow-clad lawn, stretched
         down in front to two large iron gates which closed the entrance. On the
         right side was a small wooden thicket, which led into a narrow path between
         two neat hedges stretching from the road to the kitchen door, and forming
         the tradesmen’s entrance. On the left ran a lane which led to the stables,
         and was not itself within the grounds at all, being a public, though little
         used, thoroughfare. <span class="sw-action">Holmes left us standing at the door and walked
            slowly all round the house, across the front, down the tradesmen’s
            path, and so round by the garden behind into the stable
            lane</span>. So long was he that Mr.
         Holder and I went into the dining-room and waited by the fire
         until he should return. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder, johnWatson">We were sitting there in silence</span> when the door
         opened and <span class="female" title="maryHolder">a young lady came in</span>. She was rather above the middle height,
         slim, with dark hair and eyes, which seemed the darker against the absolute
         pallor of her skin. I do not think that I have ever seen such deadly
         paleness in a woman’s face. Her lips, too, were bloodless, but her eyes were
         flushed with crying. As <span class="female" title="maryHolder">she swept silently into the room</span> she impressed me
         with a greater sense of grief than the banker had
         done in the morning, and it was the more striking in her as she was
         evidently a woman of strong character, with immense capacity for
         self-restraint. <span class="female" title="maryHolder">Disregarding my presence, she went straight to her uncle and
            passed her hand over his head with a sweet womanly caress</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated,
            have you not, dad?</q> she asked.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to
            the bottom.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what
            woman’s instincts are. I know that he has done no harm and that you
            will be sorry for having acted so harshly.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Why is he silent, then, if he is
            innocent?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Who knows? Perhaps because he was so angry that you
            should suspect him.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">How could I help suspecting him, when I actually
            saw him with the coronet in his hand?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh,
            do, do take my word for it that he is innocent. Let the matter drop
            and say no more. It is so dreadful to think of our dear Arthur in
            prison!</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I shall never let it drop until the gems are
            found—never, Mary! Your affection for
            Arthur blinds you as to the awful
            consequences to me. Far from hushing the thing up, <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I have brought a
               gentleman down from London to inquire more deeply into
               it.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">This gentleman?</q> she asked, facing round to
         me.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">No, his friend. <span class="sw-action">He wished us to leave him alone</span>.
            He is round in the stable lane now.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">The stable lane?</q> <span class="female" title="maryHolder">She raised her dark
            eyebrows.</span> <q class="female-quote">What can he hope to find there? Ah!
            this, I suppose, is he. I trust, sir, that you will succeed in
            proving, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousin Arthur is
            innocent of this crime.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I fully share your opinion, and I trust, with
            you, that we may prove it,</q> returned Holmes, going back to the mat to knock
         the snow from his shoes. <q class="sw-quote">I believe I have
            the honour of addressing Miss Mary
            Holder. Might I ask you a question or
            two?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Pray do, sir, if it may help to clear this horrible
            affair up.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You heard nothing yourself last
            night?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak loudly.
            <span class="female" title="maryHolder">I heard that, and I came down</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You shut up the windows and doors the night
            before. Did you fasten all the windows?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Were they all fastened this morning?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You have a maid who has a sweetheart? I think
            that you remarked to your uncle last night that she had been out to
            see him?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the
            drawing-room, and who may have heard uncle’s remarks about the
            coronet.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I see. <span class="female" title="maryHolder">You infer that she may have gone out to
               tell her sweetheart, and that the two may have planned the
               robbery.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">But what is the good of all these vague
            theories,</q> cried the banker impatiently, <q class="male-quote">when I have told you that I saw Arthur with the coronet in his
            hands?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back
            to that. About this girl, Miss Holder.
            You saw her return by the kitchen door, I presume?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes; <span class="female" title="maryHolder">when I went to see if the door was fastened
               for the night I met her slipping in</span>. I saw the man, too, in the
            gloom.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Do you know him?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Oh, yes! he is the greengrocer who brings our
            vegetables round. His name is Francis
            Prosper.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">He stood,</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">to the
            left of the door—that is to say, farther up the path than is
            necessary to reach the door?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes, he did.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And he is a man with a wooden leg?</q></p>
      <p>Something like fear sprang up in the young lady’s expressive black eyes. <q class="female-quote">Why, you are like a magician,</q> said
         she. <q class="female-quote">How do you know that?</q> She smiled,
         but there was no answering smile in Holmes’ thin, eager face.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I should be very glad now to go upstairs,</q>
         said he. <q class="sw-quote">I shall probably wish to go over the
            outside of the house again. Perhaps I had better take a look at the
            lower windows before I go up.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">He walked swiftly round from one to the other, pausing only at the large one
            which looked from the hall onto the stable lane. This he opened and made a
            very careful examination of the sill with his powerful magnifying lens.</span>
         <q class="sw-quote">Now we shall go upstairs,</q>
         said he at last.</p>
      <p>The banker’s dressing-room was a plainly furnished little chamber, with a grey
         carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror. <span class="sw-action">Holmes went to the bureau first and
            looked hard at the lock.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Which key was used to open it?</q> he
         asked.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">That which my son himself indicated—that of the
            cupboard of the lumber-room.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Have you it here?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">That is it on the dressing-table.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes took it up and
            opened the bureau.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is a noiseless lock,</q> said he. <q class="sw-quote"> It is no wonder that it did not wake you.
            This case, I presume, contains the coronet. We must have a look at
            it.</q> <span class="sw-action">He opened the case, and taking out the diadem he laid it
            upon the table.</span> It was a magnificent specimen of the jeweller’s art, and the
         thirty-six stones were the finest that I have ever seen. At one side of the
         coronet was a cracked edge, where a corner holding three gems had been torn
         away.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Now, Mr. Holder,</q> said 
         Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">here is the corner
            which corresponds to that which has been so unfortunately lost.
            Might I beg that you will break it off.</q></p>
      <p><span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">The banker recoiled in horror</span>. <q class="male-quote">I should not
            dream of trying,</q> said he.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Then I will.</q>
         <span class="sw-action">Holmes suddenly bent his
            strength upon it, but without result.</span> <q class="sw-quote">I feel
            it give a little,</q> said he; <q class="sw-quote">but,
            though I am exceptionally strong in the fingers, it would take me
            all my time to break it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what
            do you think would happen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a
            noise like a pistol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened
            within a few yards of your bed and that you heard nothing of
            it?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I do not know what to think. It is all dark to
            me.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go. What do
            you think, Miss Holder?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">I confess that I still share my uncle’s
            perplexity.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw
            him?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">He had nothing on save only his trousers and
            shirt.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Thank you. We have certainly been favoured with
            extraordinary luck during this inquiry, and it will be entirely our
            own fault if we do not succeed in clearing the matter up. With your
            permission, Mr. Holder, I shall now
            continue my investigations outside.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">He went alone, at his own request, for he explained that any unnecessary
            footmarks might make his task more difficult</span>. For an hour or more <span class="sw-action">he was at
            work, returning at last with his feet heavy with snow and his features as
            inscrutable as ever.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I think that I have seen now all that there is to
            see, Mr. Holder,</q> said he; <q class="sw-quote">I can serve you best by returning to my
            rooms.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are
            they?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I cannot tell.</q></p>
      <p>The banker wrung his hands. <q class="male-quote">I shall never see
            them again!</q> he cried. <q class="male-quote">And
            my son? You give me hopes?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">My opinion is in no way altered.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Then, for God’s sake, what was this dark
            business which was acted in my house last night?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms
            to-morrow morning between nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I
            can to make it clearer. I understand that you give me _carte
            blanche_ to act for you, provided only that I get back the gems, and
            that you place no limit on the sum I may draw.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I would give my fortune to have them
            back.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Very good. I shall look into the matter between
            this and then. Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come
            over here again before evening.</q></p>
      <p>It was obvious to me that my companion’s mind was now made up about the case,
         although what his conclusions were was more than I could even dimly imagine.
         Several times during our homeward journey I endeavoured to sound him upon
         the point, but he always glided away to some other topic, until at last I
         gave it over in despair. It was not yet three when we found ourselves in our
         rooms once more. <span class="sw-action">He hurried to his chamber and was down again in a few
            minutes dressed as a common loafer.</span> With his collar turned up, his shiny,
         seedy coat, his red cravat, and his worn boots, he was a perfect sample of
         the class.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I think that this should do,</q> <span class="sw-action">said he,
            glancing into the glass above the fireplace</span>. <q class="sw-quote">I only wish that you could come with me, 
            Watson, but I fear that it won’t do. I may be on the
            trail in this matter, or I may be following a will-o’-the-wisp, but
            I shall soon know which it is. I hope that I may be back in a few
            hours.</q> <span class="sw-action">He cut a slice of beef from the joint upon the
            sideboard, sandwiched it between two rounds of bread, and thrusting this
            rude meal into his pocket he started off upon his expedition.</span></p>
      <p>I had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in excellent spirits,
         swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his hand. <span class="sw-action">He chucked it down into a
            corner and helped himself to a cup of tea.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I only looked in as I passed,</q> said he.
         <q class="sw-quote">I am going right on.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Where to?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Oh, to the other side of the West End. It may be
            some time before I get back. Don’t wait up for me in case I should
            be late.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">How are you getting on?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been
            out to Streatham since I saw you last, but I did not call at the
            house. It is a very sweet little problem, and I would not have
            missed it for a good deal. However, I must not sit gossiping here,
            but must get these disreputable clothes off and return to my highly
            respectable self.</q></p>
      <p>I could see by his manner that he had stronger reasons for satisfaction than his
         words alone would imply. His eyes twinkled, and there was even a touch of
         colour upon his sallow cheeks. <span class="sw-action">He hastened upstairs, and a few minutes later
            I heard the slam of the hall door</span>, which told me that he was off once more
         upon his congenial hunt.</p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I waited until midnight, but there was no sign of his return, so I retired to my
            room</span>. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away for days and nights on end
         when he was hot upon a scent, so that his lateness caused me no surprise. I
         do not know at what hour he came in, but when I came down to breakfast in
         the morning there he was with a cup of coffee in one hand and the paper in
         the other, as fresh and trim as possible.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You will excuse my beginning without you,  Watson,</q> said
         he, <q class="sw-quote">but you remember that our client has
            rather an early appointment this morning.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Why, it is after nine now,</q> I answered. <q class="sw-quote">I should not be surprised if that were he. I
            thought I heard a ring.</q></p>
      <p>It was, indeed, our friend the financier. I was shocked by the change which had
         come over him, for his face which was naturally of a broad and massive
         mould, was now pinched and fallen in, while his hair seemed to me at least a
         shade whiter. <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">He entered with a weariness and lethargy which was even more
            painful than his violence of the morning before, and he dropped heavily into
            the armchair which I pushed forward for him.</span></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I do not know what I have done to be so severely
            tried,</q> said he. <q class="male-quote">Only two
            days ago I was a happy and prosperous man, without a care in the
            world. Now I am left to a lonely and dishonoured age. One sorrow
            comes close upon the heels of another. My niece, <span class="female" title="maryHolder"> Mary,
               has deserted me</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Deserted you?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes. Her bed this morning had not been slept in,
            her room was empty, and a note for me lay upon the hall table. I had
            said to her last night, in sorrow and not in anger, that if she had
            married my boy all might have been well with him. Perhaps it was
            thoughtless of me to say so. It is to that remark that she refers in
            this note:</q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="male-quote"><q class="female-quote">MY DEAREST
               UNCLE,—I feel that I have brought trouble upon you, and that
               if I had acted differently this terrible misfortune might
               never have occurred. I cannot, with this thought in my mind,
               ever again be happy under your roof, and I feel that I must
               leave you forever. Do not worry about my future, for that is
               provided for; and, above all, do not search for me, for it
               will be fruitless labour and an ill-service to me. In life
               or in death, I am ever your loving,</q></q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="male-quote"><q class="female-quote">
               MARY.</q></q></p>
      <p>
         <q class="male-quote">What could she mean by that note, Mr.  Holmes? Do you
            think it points to suicide?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the
            best possible solution. I trust, Mr. Holder, that you are
            nearing the end of your troubles.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Ha! You say so! You have heard something, Mr.
             Holmes;
            you have learned something! Where are the gems?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You would not think £ 1000 apiece an excessive
            sum for them?</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I would pay ten.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">That would be unnecessary. Three thousand will
            cover the matter. And there is a little reward, I fancy. Have you
            your cheque-book? Here is a pen. Better make it out for £
            4000.</q></p>
      <p>With a dazed face the banker
         made out the required check. <span class="sw-action">Holmes walked over to his desk,
            took out a little triangular piece of gold with three gems in it,
            and threw it down upon the table</span>.</p>
      <p><span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">With a shriek of joy our client clutched it up.</span></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">You have it!</q> he gasped. <q class="male-quote">I am saved! I am saved!</q></p>
      <p>The reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">he hugged his
            recovered gems to his bosom.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">There is one other thing you owe, Mr.
            Holder,</q> said Sherlock Holmes rather sternly.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Owe!</q> <span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">He caught up a pen.</span> <q class="male-quote">Name the sum, and I will pay
            it.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble
            apology to that noble lad, your son, who has carried himself in this
            matter as I should be proud to see my own son do, should I ever
            chance to have one.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Then it was not Arthur who took
            them?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I told you yesterday, and I repeat to-day, that
            it was not.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">You are sure of it! Then let us hurry to him at
            once to let him know that the truth is known.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up
            I had an interview with him, and finding that he would not tell me
            the story, I told it to him, on which <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">he had to confess that I was
               right and to add the very few details which were not yet quite clear
               to me</span>. Your news of this morning, however, may open his
            lips.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">For Heaven’s sake, tell me, then, what is this
            extraordinary mystery!</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I will do so, and I will show you the steps by
            which I reached it. And let me say to you, first, that which it is
            hardest for me to say and for you to hear: there has been an
            understanding between Sir George  Burnwell and your niece Mary. They have
            now fled together.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">My Mary? Impossible!</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is unfortunately more than possible; it is
            certain. Neither you nor your son knew the true character of this
            man when you admitted him into your family circle. He is one of the
            most dangerous men in England—a ruined gambler, an absolutely
            desperate villain, a man without heart or conscience. Your niece
            knew nothing of such men. When he breathed his vows to her, as he
            had done to a hundred before her, <span class="female" title="maryHolder">she flattered herself that she
               alone had touched his heart.</span> The devil knows best what he said, but
            at least she became his tool and was in the habit of seeing him
            nearly every evening.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I cannot, and I will not, believe it!</q>
         cried the banker with an
         ashen face.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I will tell you, then, what occurred in your
            house last night. <span class="female" title="maryHolder">Your niece, when you had, as she thought, gone to
               your room, slipped down and talked to her lover through the window
               which leads into the stable lane</span>. His footmarks had pressed right
            through the snow, so long had he stood there. <span class="female" title="maryHolder">She told him of the
               coronet.</span> His wicked lust for gold kindled at the news, and he bent
            her to his will. I have no doubt that she loved you, but there are
            women in whom the love of a lover extinguishes all other loves, and
            I think that she must have been one. She had hardly listened to his
            instructions when she saw you coming downstairs, on which <span class="female" title="maryHolder">she closed
               the window rapidly and told you about one of the servants’ escapade
               with her wooden-legged lover</span>, which was all perfectly
            true.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your boy, <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">Arthur, went to bed
               after his interview with you but he slept badly on account
               of his uneasiness about his club debts.</span> In the middle of the
            night <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">he heard a soft tread pass his door, so he rose and,
               looking out</span>, was surprised to see <span class="female" title="maryHolder">his cousin walking very
               stealthily along the passage until she disappeared into your
               dressing-room</span>. Petrified with astonishment, <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">the lad slipped
               on some clothes and waited there in the dark</span> to see what
            would come of this strange affair. Presently <span class="female" title="maryHolder">she
               emerged from the room again</span>, and in the light of the passage-lamp
            <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">your son saw that she carried the precious coronet in her hands</span>. <span class="female" title="maryHolder">She
               passed down the stairs</span>, and <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">he, thrilling with horror, ran along and
               slipped behind the curtain near your door, whence he could see what
               passed in the hall beneath</span>. <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">He saw her</span> <span class="female" title="maryHolder">stealthily open the window,
               hand out the coronet to someone in the gloom, and then closing it
               once more hurry back to her room, passing quite close to where he
               stood hid behind the curtain</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">As long as she was on the scene he could not take
            any action without a horrible exposure of the woman whom he loved.
            But the instant that she was gone he realised how crushing a
            misfortune this would be for you, and how all-important it was to
            set it right. <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">He rushed down, just as he was, in his bare feet,
               opened the window, sprang out into the snow, and ran down the lane,
               where he could see a dark figure in the moonlight</span>. Sir George
            <span class="male" title="georgeBurnwell">
               Burnwell tried to get away</span>, but
            <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">Arthur caught him, and there was a struggle
               between them, your lad tugging at one side of the coronet,
               and his opponent at the other</span>. In the scuffle, <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">your
               son struck</span> Sir
            George and <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">cut him over the eye</span>. Then something
            suddenly snapped, and <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">your son, finding that he had the coronet in
               his hands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended to your room,
               and had just observed that the coronet had been twisted in the
               struggle and was endeavouring to straighten it</span> when you appeared
            upon the scene.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Is it possible?</q> gasped the banker.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote"><span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">You then roused his anger by calling him names</span> at
            a moment when he felt that he had deserved your warmest thanks. He
            could not explain the true state of affairs without betraying one
            who certainly deserved little enough consideration at his hands. He
            took the more chivalrous view, however, and preserved her
            secret.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">And that was why <span class="female" title="maryHolder">she shrieked and fainted when
               she saw the coronet</span>,</q> cried Mr. Holder. <q class="male-quote">Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been!
            And his asking to be allowed to go out for five minutes! The dear
            fellow wanted to see if the missing piece were at the scene of the
            struggle. How cruelly I have misjudged him!</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">When I arrived at the house,</q> continued
         Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">I at once went very carefully round it to
            observe if there were any traces in the snow which might help me. I
            knew that none had fallen since the evening before, and also that
            there had been a strong frost to preserve impressions. <span class="sw-action">I passed
               along the tradesmen’s path, but found it all trampled down and
               indistinguishable</span>. Just beyond it, however, at the far side of the
            kitchen door, <span class="female" title="lucyParr">a woman had stood and talked with a man</span>, whose round
            impressions on one side showed that he had a wooden leg. I could
            even tell that they had been disturbed, for the woman had run back
            swiftly to the door, as was shown by the deep toe and light heel
            marks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little, and then had gone away.
            I thought at the time that this might be the maid and her
            sweetheart, of whom you had already spoken to me, and inquiry showed
            it was so. <span class="sw-action">I passed round the garden without seeing anything more
               than random tracks</span>, which I took to be the police; but when I got
            into the stable lane a very long and complex story was written in
            the snow in front of me.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">There was a double line of tracks of a booted
            man, and a second double line which <span class="sw-action">I saw with delight</span> belonged to a
            man with naked feet. <span class="sw-action">I was at once convinced from what you had told
               me that the latter was your son</span>. The first had walked both ways, but
            the other had run swiftly, and as his tread was marked in places
            over the depression of the boot, it was obvious that he had passed
            after the other. <span class="sw-action">I followed them up and found they led to the hall
               window</span>, where Boots had worn all the snow away while waiting. Then <span class="sw-action">I
               walked to the other end, which was a hundred yards or more down the
               lane. I saw where Boots had faced round</span>, where the snow was cut up
            as though there had been a struggle, and, finally, where a few drops
            of blood had fallen, to show me that I was not mistaken. <span class="male" title="georgeBurnwell">Boots had
               then run down the lane</span>, and another little smudge of blood showed
            that it was he who had been hurt. When <span class="male" title="georgeBurnwell">he came to the highroad at
               the other end</span>, I found that the pavement had been cleared, so there
            was an end to that clue.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote"><span class="sw-action">On entering the house, however, I examined, as
               you remember, the sill and framework of the hall window with my
               lens,</span> and <span class="sw-action">I could at once see that someone had passed out. I could
               distinguish the outline of an instep where the wet foot had been
               placed in coming in. I was then beginning to be able to form an
               opinion as to what had occurred</span>. A man had waited outside the
            window; someone had brought the gems; the deed had been overseen by
            your son; he had pursued the thief; had struggled with him; they had
            each tugged at the coronet, their united strength causing injuries
            which neither alone could have effected. <span class="male" title="arthurHolder">He had returned with the
               prize, but had left a fragment in the grasp of his opponent</span>. So far
            I was clear. The question now was, who was the man and who was it
            brought him the coronet?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is an old maxim of mine that when you have
            excluded the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must
            be the truth. Now, I knew that it was not you who had brought it
            down, so there only remained your niece and the maids. But if it
            were the maids, why should your son allow himself to be accused in
            their place? There could be no possible reason. As he loved his
            cousin, however, there was an excellent explanation why he should
            retain her secret—the more so as the secret was a disgraceful one.
            When <span class="sw-action">I remembered that you had seen her at that window, and how she
               had fainted on seeing the coronet again</span>, my conjecture became a
            certainty.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And who could it be who was her confederate? A
            lover evidently, for who else could outweigh the love and gratitude
            which she must feel to you? I knew that you went out little, and
            that your circle of friends was a very limited one. But among them
            was Sir George Burnwell. I had heard of him before as being a man
            of evil reputation among women. It must have been <span class="male" title="georgeBurnwell">he who wore those
               boots and retained the missing gems.</span> Even though he knew that Arthur had
            discovered him, he might still flatter himself that he was safe, for
            the lad could not say a word without compromising his own
            family.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, your own good sense will suggest what
            measures I took next. <span class="sw-action">I went in the shape of a loafer</span> to Sir George’s
            house, <span class="sw-action">managed to pick up an acquaintance with his valet, learned
               that his master had cut his head the night before, and, finally, at
               the expense of six shillings, made all sure by buying a pair of his
               cast-off shoes. With these I journeyed down to Streatham and saw
               that they exactly fitted the tracks.</span></q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"><span class="male" title="alexanderHolder">I saw an ill-dressed vagabond in the lane
               yesterday evening</span>,</q> said Mr. Holder.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Precisely. It was I. <span class="sw-action">I found that I had my man,
               so I came home and changed my clothes</span>. It was a delicate part which
            I had to play then, for <span class="sw-action">I saw that a prosecution must be avoided to
               avert scandal, and I knew that so astute a villain would see that
               our hands were tied in the matter. I went and saw him.</span> At first, of
            course, <span class="male" title="georgeBurnwell">he denied everything</span>. But when <span class="sw-action">I gave him every particular
               that had occurred</span>, <span class="male" title="georgeBurnwell">he tried to bluster and took down a
               life-preserver from the wall</span>. I knew my man, however, and <span class="sw-action">I clapped
               a pistol to his head before he could strike</span>. Then he became a little
            more reasonable. <span class="sw-action">I told him that we would give him a price for the
               stones he held—£ 1000 apiece</span>. That brought out the first signs of
            grief that he had shown. <q class="male-quote">Why, dash it
               all!</q><br/> said he, <q class="male-quote">I’ve let
               them go at six hundred for the three!</q> <span class="sw-action">I soon managed
               to get the address of the receiver who had them, on promising him
               that there would be no prosecution.</span> <span class="sw-action">Off I set to him, and after much
               chaffering I got our stones at £ 1000 apiece. Then I looked in upon
               your son, told him that all was right, and eventually got to my bed
               about two o’clock</span>, after what I may call a really hard day’s
            work.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">A day which has saved England from a great
            public scandal,</q> said the banker, rising. <q class="male-quote">Sir, I cannot find words to thank you, but
            you shall not find me ungrateful for what you have done. Your skill
            has indeed exceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must fly
            to my dear boy to apologise to him for the wrong which I have done
            him. As to what you tell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart.
            Not even your skill can inform me where she is now.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I think that we may safely say,</q> returned
         Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">that she is wherever Sir George Burnwell is. It
            is equally certain, too, that whatever her sins are, they will soon
            receive a more than sufficient punishment.</q></p>
      <p>On glancing over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which I have during the last
         eight
         years studied the methods of my friend Sherlock Holmes, I find many tragic, some comic,
         a large number merely strange, but none commonplace; for, working as he did rather
         for
         the love of his art than for the acquirement of wealth, he refused to associate himself
         with any investigation which did not tend towards the unusual, and even the fantastic.
         Of all these varied cases, however, I cannot recall any which presented more singular
         features than that which was associated with the well-known Surrey family of the
         Roylotts of Stoke Moran. The events in question occurred in the early days of my
         association with Holmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelors in Baker Street.
         It is
         possible that I might have placed them upon record before, but a promise of secrecy
         was
         made at the time, from which I have only been freed during the last month by the
         untimely death of the lady to whom the pledge was given. It is perhaps as well that
         the
         facts should now come to light, for I have reasons to know that there are widespread
         rumours as to the death of &gt;Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the matter even more
         terrible than the truth.</p>
      <p>It was early in April in the year '83 that <span class="sw-action">I woke one morning</span> to find <span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes
            standing, fully dressed, by the side of my bed</span>. He was a late riser, as a rule, and as
         the clock on the mantelpiece showed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, <span class="sw-action">I blinked
            up at him in some surprise, and perhaps just a little resentment, for I was myself
            regular in my habits</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Very sorry to knock you up, Watson,</q> said he,
         <q class="sw-quote">but it's the common lot this morning. Mrs. Hudson
            has been knocked up, she retorted upon me, and I on you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What is it, then—a fire?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No; a client. It seems that <span class="female" title="helenStoner">a young lady has arrived in
               a considerable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She is waiting now
               in the sitting-room.</span> Now, when young ladies wander about the metropolis at this hour
            of the morning, and knock sleepy people up out of their beds, I presume that it is
            something very pressing which they have to communicate. Should it prove to be an
            interesting case, you would, I am sure, wish to follow it from the outset. I
            thought, at any rate, that I should call you and give you the chance.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">My dear fellow, I would not miss it for
            anything.</q></p>
      <p>I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in his professional investigations, and
         in admiring the rapid deductions, as swift as intuitions, and yet always founded on
         a
         logical basis with which he unravelled the problems which were submitted to him. <span class="sw-action">I
            rapidly threw on my clothes and was ready in a few minutes to accompany my friend
            down
            to the sitting-room.</span> <span class="female" title="helenStoner">A lady dressed in black and heavily veiled, who had been sitting in
            the window, rose as we entered.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Good-morning, madam,</q> said Holmes cheerily.
         <q class="sw-quote">My name is Sherlock Holmes. This is my intimate
            friend and associate, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before
            myself. Ha! I am glad to see that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the
            fire. Pray draw up to it, and I shall order you a cup of hot coffee, for I observe
            that <span class="female" title="helenStoner">you are shivering</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">It is not cold which makes me shiver,</q> said the
         woman in a low voice, <span class="female" title="helenStoner">changing her seat as requested</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What, then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror.</q> <span class="female" title="helenStoner">She raised
            her veil as she spoke</span>, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable state of
         agitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restless frightened eyes, like those
         of
         some hunted animal. Her features and figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her
         hair was shot with premature grey, and her expression was weary and haggard. <span class="sw-action">Sherlock
             Holmes ran her over with one of his quick, all-comprehensive glances.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You must not fear,</q> said <span class="sw-action">he soothingly, bending
            forward and patting her forearm</span>. <q class="sw-quote">We shall soon set
            matters right, I have no doubt. You have come in by train this morning, I
            see.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">You know me, then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in
            the palm of your left glove. You must have started early, and yet you had a good
            drive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached the station.</q></p>
      <p><span class="female" title="helenStoner">The lady gave a violent start and stared in bewilderment at my companion</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">There is no mystery, my dear madam,</q> said he,
         smiling. <q class="sw-quote">The left arm of your jacket is spattered with
            mud in no less than seven places. The marks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle
            save a dog-cart which throws up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the
            left-hand side of the driver.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly
            correct,</q> said she. <q class="female-quote"><span class="female" title="helenStoner">I started from home before
               six, reached Leatherhead at twenty past, and came in by the first train to Waterloo</span>.
            Sir, I can stand this strain no longer; I shall go mad if it continues. I have no
            one to turn to—none, save only one, who cares for me, and he, poor fellow, can be
            of
            little aid. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs.
            Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour of her sore need. It was from her that I had
            your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you could help me, too, and at least
            throw a little light through the dense darkness which surrounds me? At present it
            is
            out of my power to reward you for your services, but in a month or six weeks I shall
            be married, with the control of my own income, and then at least you shall not find
            me ungrateful.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Holmes turned to his desk and, unlocking it, drew out a small case-book, which he
            consulted.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Farintosh,</q> said he. <q class="sw-quote">Ah yes, I recall the case; it was concerned with an opal
            tiara. I think it was before your time, Watson. I can only say, madam, that I shall
            be happy to devote the same care to your case as I did to that of your friend. As
            to
            reward, my profession is its own reward; but you are at liberty to defray whatever
            expenses I may be put to, at the time which suits you best. And now I beg that you
            will lay before us everything that may help us in forming an opinion upon the
            matter.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Alas!</q> replied our visitor, <q class="female-quote">the very horror of my situation lies in the fact that my
            fears are so vague, and my suspicions depend so entirely upon small points, which
            might seem trivial to another, that even he to whom of all others I have a right to
            look for help and advice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fancies of
            a
            nervous woman. He does not say so, but I can read it from his soothing answers and
            averted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the
            manifold wickedness of the human heart. You may advise me how to walk amid the
            dangers which encompass me.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I am all attention, madam.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my
            stepfather, who is the last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in England,
            the Roylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of Surrey.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Holmes nodded his head</span>. <q class="sw-quote">The name is familiar to
            me,</q> said he.</p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">The family was at one time among the richest in England,
            and the estates extended over the borders into Berkshire in the north, and Hampshire
            in the west. In the last century, however, four successive heirs were of a dissolute
            and wasteful disposition, and the family ruin was eventually completed by a gambler
            in the days of the Regency. Nothing was left save a few acres of ground, and the
            two-hundred-year-old house, which is itself crushed under a heavy mortgage. The last
            squire dragged out his existence there, living the horrible life of an aristocratic
            pauper; but his only son, my stepfather, seeing that he must adapt himself to the
            new conditions, obtained an advance from a relative, which enabled him to take a
            medical degree and went out to Calcutta, where, by his professional skill and his
            force of character, he established a large practice. In a fit of anger, however,
            caused by some robberies which had been perpetrated in the house, he beat his native
            butler to death and narrowly escaped a capital sentence. As it was, he suffered a
            long term of imprisonment and afterwards returned to England a morose and
            disappointed man.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote"><span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother,</span> Mrs.
            Stoner, the young widow of Major-General Stoner, of the Bengal Artillery. My sister
            Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at the time of my mother's
            re-marriage. <span class="female" title="mrsStoner">She had a considerable sum of money—not less than £ 1000 a year—and
               this she bequeathed to Dr.</span> Roylott entirely while we resided with him, with a
            provision that a certain annual sum should be allowed to each of us in the event of
            our marriage. Shortly after our return to England <span class="female" title="mrsStoner">my mother died—she was killed
               eight years ago in a railway accident near Crewe.</span> <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">Dr. Roylott then abandoned his
               attempts to establish himself in practice in London and took us to live with him in
               the old ancestral house at Stoke Moran.</span> The money which my mother had left was
            enough for all our wants, and there seemed to be no obstacle to our
            happiness.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this
            time. Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with our neighbours, who had
            at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back in the old family seat,
            <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">he shut himself up in his house and seldom came out save to indulge in ferocious
               quarrels with whoever might cross his path</span>. Violence of temper approaching to mania
            has been hereditary in the men of the family, and in my stepfather's case it had,
            I
            believe, been intensified by his long residence in the tropics. A series of
            disgraceful brawls took place, two of which ended in the police-court, until at last
            he became the terror of the village, and the folks would fly at his approach, for
            he
            is a man of immense strength, and absolutely uncontrollable in his
            anger.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Last week <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">he hurled the local blacksmith over a parapet
               into a stream</span>, and it was only by paying over all the money which I could gather
            together that I was able to avert another public exposure. He had no friends at all
            save the wandering gipsies, and <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">he would give these vagabonds leave to encamp upon
               the few acres of bramble-covered land which represent the family estate, and would
               accept in return the hospitality of their tents, wandering away with them sometimes
               for weeks on end</span>. He has a passion also for Indian animals, which are sent over to
            him by a correspondent, and he has at this moment a cheetah and a baboon, which
            wander freely over his grounds and are feared by the villagers almost as much as
            their master.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia
            and I had no great pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with us, and for a
            long time we did all the work of the house. She was but thirty at the time of her
            death, and yet her hair had already begun to whiten, even as mine has.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your sister is dead, then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote"><span class="female" title="juliaStoner">She died just two years ago</span>, and it is of her death that I
            wish to speak to you. You can understand that, living the life which I have
            described, we were little likely to see anyone of our own age and position. We had,
            however, an aunt, my mother's maiden sister, Miss Honoria Westphail, who lives near
            Harrow, and we were occasionally allowed to pay short visits at this lady's house.
            <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">Julia went there at Christmas two years ago, and met there a half-pay major of
               marines, to whom she became engaged</span>. My stepfather learned of the engagement when my
            sister returned and offered no objection to the marriage; but within a fortnight of
            the day which had been fixed for the wedding, the terrible event occurred which has
            deprived me of my only companion.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyes closed and his head sunk
            in a cushion, but he half opened his lids now and glanced across at his visitor.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Pray be precise as to details,</q> said he.</p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that
            dreadful time is seared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said,
            very old, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bedrooms in this wing are on the
            ground floor, the sitting-rooms being in the central block of the buildings. Of
            these bedrooms the first is Dr. Roylott's, the second my sister's, and the third my
            own. There is no communication between them, but they all open out into the same
            corridor. Do I make myself plain?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Perfectly so.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That
            fatal night <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early</span>, though we knew that he had not
            retired to rest, for my sister was troubled by the smell of the strong Indian cigars
            which it was his custom to smoke. <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">She left her room, therefore, and came into mine,
               where she sat for some time, chatting about her approaching wedding</span>. At eleven
            o'clock <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">she rose to leave me, but she paused at the door and looked
               back</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote"><q class="female-quote">Tell me, Helen,</q><br/> said
            she, <q class="female-quote">have you ever heard anyone whistle in the dead of
               the night?</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Never,</q><br/> said I. <q class="female-quote">I
               suppose that you could not possibly whistle, yourself, in your sleep?</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Certainly not.</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">But why?</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Because during the last few nights I have always, about
               three in the morning, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper, and it
               has awakened me. I cannot tell where it came from—perhaps from the next room,
               perhaps from the lawn. I thought that I would just ask you whether you had heard
               it.</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">No, I have not. It must be those wretched gipsies in
               the plantation.</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Very likely. And yet if it were on the lawn, I wonder
               that you did not hear it also.</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Ah, but I sleep more heavily than you.</q><br/>
            <q class="female-quote">Well, it is of no great consequence, at any
               rate.</q> <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">She smiled back at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I
               heard her key turn in the lock</span>.'</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Indeed,</q> said Holmes. <q class="sw-quote">Was it your custom always to lock yourselves in at
            night?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Always.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And why?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">I think that I mentioned to you that the Doctor kept a
            cheetah and a baboon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were
            locked.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Quite so. Pray proceed with your statement.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">I could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impending
            misfortune impressed me. My sister and I, you will recollect, were twins, and you
            know how subtle are the links which bind two souls which are so closely allied. It
            was a wild night. The wind was howling outside, and the rain was beating and
            splashing against the windows. Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale, there
            burst forth the wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew that it was my sister's
            voice. <span class="female" title="helenStoner">I sprang from my bed, wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the corridor</span>.
            <span class="female" title="helenStoner"> As I opened my door I seemed to hear a low whistle, such as my sister described, and
               a few moments later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen</span>. As <span class="female" title="helenStoner">I ran
               down the passage,</span> my sister's door was unlocked, and revolved slowly upon its
            hinges. <span class="female" title="helenStoner">I stared at it horror-stricken, not knowing what was about to issue from it.</span>
            By the light of the corridor-lamp I saw my sister appear at the opening, <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">her face
               blanched with terror, her hands groping for help, her whole figure swaying to and
               fro like that of a drunkard.</span> <span class="female" title="helenStoner">I ran to her and threw my arms round her</span>, but at that
            moment <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground. She writhed as one
               who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were dreadfully convulsed</span>. At first I thought
            that she had not recognised me, but as <span class="female" title="helenStoner">I bent over her</span> <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">she suddenly shrieked out in
               a voice which I shall never forget</span>, 'Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The
            speckled band!' There was something else which she would fain have said, and <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">she
               stabbed with her finger into the air</span> in the direction of the Doctor's room, but a
            fresh convulsion seized her and choked her words. <span class="female" title="helenStoner">I rushed out, calling loudly for
               my stepfather, and I met him hastening from his room in his dressing-gown</span>. When he
            reached my sister's side she was unconscious, and though <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">he poured brandy down her
               throat and sent for medical aid from the village</span>, all efforts were in vain, for <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">she
               slowly sank and died without having recovered her consciousness</span>. Such was the
            dreadful end of my beloved sister.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">One moment,</q> said Holmes, <q class="sw-quote">are you sure about this whistle and metallic sound? Could
            you swear to it?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry.
            It is my strong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of the gale and
            the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have been deceived.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Was your sister dressed?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found
            the charred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Showing that <span class="female" title="juliaStoner">she had struck a light and looked about her
               when the alarm took place</span>. That is important. And what conclusions did the coroner
            come to?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott's
            conduct had long been notorious in the county, but he was unable to find any
            satisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that the door had been fastened upon
            the inner side, and the windows were blocked by old-fashioned shutters with broad
            iron bars, which were secured every night. The walls were carefully sounded, and
            were shown to be quite solid all round, and the flooring was also thoroughly
            examined, with the same result. The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four large
            staples. It is certain, therefore, that my sister was quite alone when she met her
            end. Besides, there were no marks of any violence upon her.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">How about poison?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">The doctors examined her for it, but without
            success.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of,
            then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous
            shock, though what it was that frightened her I cannot imagine.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Were there gipsies in the plantation at the
            time?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes, there are nearly always some there.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion to a
            band—a speckled band?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk
            of delirium, sometimes that it may have referred to some band of people, perhaps to
            these very gipsies in the plantation. I do not know whether the spotted
            handkerchiefs which so many of them wear over their heads might have suggested the
            strange adjective which she used.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">These are very deep waters,</q> said he; <q class="sw-quote">pray go on with your narrative.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Two years have passed since then, and my life has been
            until lately lonelier than ever. A month ago, however, <span class="male" title="percyArmitage">a dear friend, whom I have
               known for many years, has done me the honour to ask my hand in marriage</span>. His name is
            Armitage—Percy Armitage—the second son of Mr. Armitage, of Crane Water, near
            Reading. My stepfather has offered no opposition to the match, and we are to be
            married in the course of the spring. Two days ago some repairs were started in the
            west wing of the building, and my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I have had
            to move into the chamber in which my sister died, and to sleep in the very bed in
            which she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terror when last night, as I lay awake,
            thinking over her terrible fate, <span class="female" title="helenStoner">I suddenly heard in the silence of the night the
               low whistle which had been the herald of her own death</span>. <span class="female" title="helenStoner">I sprang up and lit the
               lamp, but nothing was to be seen in the room</span>. I was too shaken to go to bed again,
            however, so <span class="female" title="helenStoner">I dressed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped down, got a dog-cart
               at the Crown Inn, which is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead</span>, from whence I have
            come on this morning with the one object of seeing you and asking your
            advice.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You have done wisely,</q> said my friend. <q class="sw-quote">But have you told me all?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes, all.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screening your
            stepfather.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Why, what do you mean?</q></p>
      <p>For answer<span class="sw-action"> Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed the hand that lay
            upon our visitor's knee</span>. Five little livid spots, the marks of four fingers and a thumb,
         were printed upon the white wrist.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You have been cruelly used,</q> said Holmes.</p>
      <p><span class="female" title="helenStoner">The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist</span>. <q class="female-quote">He is a hard man,</q> she said, <q class="female-quote">and perhaps he hardly knows his own strength.</q></p>
      <p>There was a long silence, during which<span class="sw-action"> Holmes leaned his chin upon his hands and stared
            into the crackling fire.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">This is a very deep business,</q> he said at last.
         <q class="sw-quote">There are a thousand details which I should desire
            to know before I decide upon our course of action. Yet we have not a moment to lose.
            If we were to come to Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us to see over
            these rooms without the knowledge of your stepfather?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">As it happens, <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">he spoke of coming into town to-day upon
               some most important business.</span> It is probable that he will be away all day, and that
            there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a housekeeper now, but she is old and
            foolish, and I could easily get her out of the way.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Excellent. You are not averse to this trip,
             Watson?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">By no means.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Then we shall both come. What are you going to do
            yourself?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that
            I am in town. But I shall return by the twelve o'clock train, so as to be there in
            time for your coming.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And you may expect us early in the afternoon. I have
            myself some small business matters to attend to. Will you not wait and
            breakfast?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have
            confided my trouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you again this
            afternoon.</q> <span class="female" title="helenStoner">She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glided from
            the room.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And what do you think of it all, Watson?</q> asked
         Sherlock Holmes, leaning back in his chair.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister
            business.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Dark enough and sinister enough.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and
            walls are sound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable, then her
            sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her mysterious end.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whistles, and
            what of the very peculiar words of the dying woman?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I cannot think.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the
            presence of a band of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, the
            fact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has an interest in
            preventing his stepdaughter's marriage, the dying allusion to a band, and, finally,
            the fact that <span class="female" title="helenStoner">Miss Helen Stoner heard a metallic clang</span>, which might have been caused
            by one of those metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its place,
            I
            think that there is good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared along those
            lines.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">But what, then, did the gipsies do?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I cannot imagine.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I see many objections to any such theory.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are
            going to Stoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the objections are fatal, or
            if
            they may be explained away. But what in the name of the devil!</q></p>
      <p>The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact that our door had been
         suddenly dashed open, and that <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">a huge man had framed himself in the aperture</span>. His
         costume was a peculiar mixture of the professional and of the agricultural, having
         a
         black top-hat, a long frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop
         swinging in his hand. So tall was he that his hat actually brushed the cross bar of
         the
         doorway, and his breadth seemed to span it across from side to side. A large face,
         seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, and marked with every
         evil
         passion, was turned from one to the other of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes,
         and
         his high, thin, fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to a fierce old
         bird
         of prey.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Which of you is Holmes?</q> asked this
         apparition.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">My name, sir; but you have the advantage of me,</q>
         said my companion quietly.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Indeed, Doctor,</q> said Holmes blandly. <q class="sw-quote">Pray take a seat.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I will do nothing of the kind. My stepdaughter has been
            here. I have traced her. What has she been saying to you?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is a little cold for the time of the year,</q>
         said Holmes.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">What has she been saying to you?</q> screamed the
         old man furiously.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">But I have heard that the crocuses promise well,</q>
         continued my companion imperturbably.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Ha! You put me off, do you?</q> said our new
         visitor, taking a step forward and shaking his hunting-crop. <q class="male-quote">I know you, you scoundrel! I have heard of you before.
            You are Holmes, the meddler.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">My friend smiled</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"> Holmes , the busybody!</q></p>
      <p>His smile broadened.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote"> Holmes , the Scotland Yard Jack-in-office!</q></p>
      <p>Holmes chuckled heartily. <q class="sw-quote">Your conversation is most entertaining,</q> said he.
         <q class="sw-quote">When you go out close the door, for there is a decided draught.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">I will go when I have had my say. Don't you dare to
            meddle with my affairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">I traced her!</span> I am a
            dangerous man to fall foul of! See here.</q> <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">He stepped swiftly forward, seized
            the poker, and bent it into a curve with his huge brown hands</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">See that you keep yourself out of my grip,</q> he
         snarled, and <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">hurling the twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of the room</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">He seems a very amiable person,</q> said  Holmes ,
         laughing. <q class="sw-quote">I am not quite so bulky, but if he had
            remained I might have shown him that my grip was not much more feeble than his
            own.</q> <span class="sw-action">As he spoke he picked up the steel poker and, with a sudden effort,
            straightened it out again</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the
            official detective force! This incident gives zest to our investigation, however,
            and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer from her imprudence in
            allowing this brute to trace her. And now, Watson, we shall order breakfast, and
            afterwards I shall walk down to Doctors' Commons, where I hope to get some data
            which may help us in this matter.</q></p>
      <p>It was nearly one o'clock when <span class="sw-action">Sherlock Holmes returned from his excursion. He held in
            his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawled over with notes and figures</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I have seen the will of the deceased wife,</q> said
         he. <q class="sw-quote">To determine its exact meaning I have been obliged
            to work out the present prices of the investments with which it is concerned. The
            total income, which at the time of the wife's death was little short of £ 1,100, is
            now, through the fall in agricultural prices, not more than £ 750. Each daughter can
            claim an income of £ 250, in case of marriage. It is evident, therefore, that if
            both girls had married, this beauty would have had a mere pittance, while even one
            of them would cripple him to a very serious extent. My morning's work has not been
            wasted, since it has proved that he has the very strongest motives for standing in
            the way of anything of the sort. And now, Watson, this is too serious for dawdling,
            especially as the old man is aware that we are interesting ourselves in his affairs;
            so if you are ready, we shall call a cab and drive to Waterloo. I should be very
            much obliged if you would slip your revolver into your pocket. An Eley's No. 2 is
            an
            excellent argument with gentlemen who can twist steel pokers into knots. That and
            a
            tooth-brush are, I think, all that we need.</q></p>
      <p>At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for Leatherhead, where we hired
         a trap
         at the station inn and drove for four or five miles through the lovely Surrey lanes.
         It
         was a perfect day, with a bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heavens. The trees
         and wayside hedges were just throwing out their first green shoots, and the air was
         full
         of the pleasant smell of the moist earth. To me at least there was a strange contrast
         between the sweet promise of the spring and this sinister quest upon which we were
         engaged. <span class="sw-action">My companion sat in the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down
            over his eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in the deepest thought.</span>
         Suddenly, however, <span class="sw-action">he started, tapped me on the shoulder, and pointed over the
            meadows.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Look there!</q> said he.</p>
      <p>A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickening into a grove at
         the
         highest point. From amid the branches there jutted out the grey gables and high
         roof-tree of a very old mansion.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Stoke Moran?</q> said he.</p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott,</q> remarked the
         driver.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">There is some building going on there,</q> said  Holmes ; <q class="sw-quote">that is where
            we are going.</q></p>
      <p><q class="male-quote">There's the village,</q> said the driver, pointing to a cluster of roofs some
         distance to the left; <q class="male-quote">but if you want to get to the house, you'll find it shorter
            to get over this stile, and so by the footpath over the fields. There it is, where
            the lady is walking.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner,</q> observed <span class="sw-action"> Holmes , shading his eyes.</span>
         <q class="sw-quote">Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest.</q></p>
      <p>We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its way to Leatherhead.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I thought it as well,</q> said Holmes as we climbed the stile, <q class="sw-quote">that
            this fellow should think we had come here as architects, or on some definite
            business. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner. You see that we have
            been as good as our word.</q></p>
      <p>Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with a face which spoke her
         joy.
         <q class="female-quote">I have been waiting so eagerly for you,</q> <span class="female" title="helenStoner">she cried, shaking hands with
            us warmly</span>. <q class="female-quote">All has turned out splendidly. Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is
            unlikely that he will be back before evening.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">We have had the pleasure of making the Doctor's acquaintance,</q> said  Holmes ,
         and in a few words he sketched out what had occurred.<span class="female" title="helenStoner"> Miss Stoner turned white to the
            lips as she listened</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Good heavens!</q> she cried, <q class="female-quote">he has followed me, then.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">So it appears.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">He is so cunning that I never know when I am safe from him. What will he say when
            he returns?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">He must guard himself, for he may find that there is someone more cunning than
            himself upon his track. You must lock yourself up from him to-night. If he is
            violent, we shall take you away to your aunt's at Harrow. Now, we must make the best
            use of our time, so kindly take us at once to the rooms which we are to
            examine.</q></p>
      <p>The building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high central portion and two
         curving wings, like the claws of a crab, thrown out on each side. In one of these
         wings
         the windows were broken and blocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly
         caved
         in, a picture of ruin. The central portion was in little better repair, but the
         right-hand block was comparatively modern, and the blinds in the windows, with the
         blue
         smoke curling up from the chimneys, showed that this was where the family resided.
         Some
         scaffolding had been erected against the end wall, and the stone-work had been broken
         into, but there were no signs of any workmen at the moment of our visit.<span class="sw-action"> Holmes walked
            slowly up and down the ill-trimmed lawn and examined with deep attention the outsides
            of
            the windows.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep, the centre one to
            your sister's, and the one next to the main building to Dr. Roylott's
            chamber?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the middle one.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Pending the alterations, as I understand. By the way, there does not seem to be
            any very pressing need for repairs at that end wall.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">There were none. I believe that it was an excuse to move me from my
            room.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow wing runs the
            corridor from which these three rooms open. There are windows in it, of
            course?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes, but very small ones. Too narrow for anyone to pass through.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were unapproachable from that
            side. Now, would you have the kindness to go into your room and bar your
            shutters?</q></p>
      <p>,Miss Stoner did so, and <span class="sw-action"> Holmes , after a careful examination through the open window,
            endeavoured in every way to force the shutter open, but without success</span>. There was no
         slit through which a knife could be passed to raise the bar. Then with his lens <span class="sw-action">he
            tested the hinges</span>, but they were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive masonry.
         <q class="sw-quote">Hum!</q> said he, <span class="sw-action">scratching his chin in some perplexity</span>, <q class="sw-quote">my
            theory certainly presents some difficulties. No one could pass these shutters if
            they were bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon the
            matter.</q></p>
      <p>A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which the three bedrooms
         opened.
         <span class="sw-action"> Holmes refused to examine the third chamber</span>, so we passed at once to the second, that in
         which Miss Stoner was now sleeping, and in which her sister had met with her fate. It
         was a homely little room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace, after the fashion
         of old country-houses. A brown chest of drawers stood in one corner, a narrow
         white-counterpaned bed in another, and a dressing-table on the left-hand side of the
         window. These articles, with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture
         in
         the room save for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre. The boards round and the
         panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so old and discoloured that
         it may
         have dated from the original building of the house.<span class="sw-action"> Holmes drew one of the chairs into a
            corner and sat silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down, taking
            in every detail of the apartment.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Where does that bell communicate with?</q> <span class="sw-action">he asked at last pointing to a
            thick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed</span>, the tassel actually lying upon the
         pillow.</p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">It goes to the housekeeper's room.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It looks newer than the other things?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your sister asked for it, I suppose?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get what we wanted for
            ourselves.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there. You will excuse me
            for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to this floor.</q> <span class="sw-action">He threw himself
            down upon his face with his lens in his hand and crawled swiftly backward and forward,
            examining minutely the cracks between the boards. Then he did the same with the
            wood-work with which the chamber was panelled. </span>Finally <span class="sw-action">he walked over to the bed and
            spent some time in staring at it and in running his eye up and down the wall. Finally
            he
            took the bell-rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Why, it's a dummy,</q> said he.</p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Won't it ring?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting. You can see now
            that it is fastened to a hook just above where the little opening for the ventilator
            is.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">How very absurd! I never noticed that before.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Very strange!</q> muttered <span class="sw-action">Holmes, pulling at the rope</span>. <q class="sw-quote">There are one
            or two very singular points about this room. For example, what a fool a builder must
            be to open a ventilator into another room, when, with the same trouble, he might
            have communicated with the outside air!</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">That is also quite modern,</q> said the lady.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Done about the same time as the bell-rope?</q> remarked Holmes.</p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes, there were several little changes carried out about that time.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">They seem to have been of a most interesting character—dummy bell-ropes, and
            ventilators which do not ventilate. With your permission, Miss Stoner, we shall now
            carry our researches into the inner apartment.</q></p>
      <p>Dr. Grimesby Roylott's chamber was larger than that of his step-daughter, but was as
         plainly furnished. A camp-bed, a small wooden shelf full of books, mostly of a technical
         character, an armchair beside the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, a round
         table, and a large iron safe were the principal things which met the eye. Holmes walked
         slowly round and examined each and all of them with the keenest interest.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What's in here?</q> he asked, tapping the safe.</p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">My stepfather's business papers.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Oh! you have seen inside, then?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">There isn't a cat in it, for example?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">No. What a strange idea!</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, look at this!</q> <span class="sw-action">He took up a small saucer of milk which stood on the
            top of it.</span></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">No; we don't keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet a saucer of milk
            does not go very far in satisfying its wants, I daresay. There is one point which
            I
            should wish to determine.</q> <span class="sw-action">He squatted down in front of the wooden chair and
            examined the seat of it with the greatest attention</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Thank you. That is quite settled,</q> said he, <span class="sw-action">rising and putting his lens in
            his pocket</span>. <q class="sw-quote">Hullo! Here is something interesting!</q></p>
      <p>The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on one corner of the
         bed.
         The lash, however, was curled upon itself and tied so as to make a loop of whipcord.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What do you make of that, Watson?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It's a common enough lash. But I don't know why it should be tied.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it's a wicked world, and when a clever
            man turns his brains to crime it is the worst of all. I think that I have seen
            enough now, Miss Stoner, and with your permission we shall walk out upon the
            lawn.</q></p>
      <p>I had never seen my friend's face so grim or his brow so dark as it was when we turned
         from the scene of this investigation. We had walked several times up and down the
         lawn,
         neither Miss Stoner nor myself liking to break in upon his thoughts before he roused
         himself from his reverie.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is very essential, Miss Stoner,</q> said he, <q class="sw-quote">that you should
            absolutely follow my advice in every respect.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">I shall most certainly do so.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The matter is too serious for any hesitation. Your life may depend upon your
            compliance.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">I assure you that I am in your hands.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night in your
            room.</q></p>
      <p>Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in astonishment.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is the village inn over
            there?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Yes, that is the Crown.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Very good. Your windows would be visible from there?</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Certainly.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of a headache, when your
            stepfather comes back. Then when you hear him retire for the night, you must open
            the shutters of your window, undo the hasp, put your lamp there as a signal to us,
            and then withdraw quietly with everything which you are likely to want into the room
            which you used to occupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the repairs, you could
            manage there for one night.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Oh, yes, easily.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The rest you will leave in our hands.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">But what will you do?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigate the cause of this
            noise which has disturbed you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">I believe, Mr.  Holmes , that you have already made up your mind,</q> said Miss
         Stoner, laying her hand upon my companion's sleeve.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Perhaps I have.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">Then, for pity's sake, tell me what was the cause of my sister's
            death.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I should prefer to have clearer proofs before I speak.</q></p>
      <p><q class="female-quote">You can at least tell me whether my own thought is correct, and if she died from
            some sudden fright.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some more tangible cause.
            And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr. Roylott returned and saw us our
            journey would be in vain. Good-bye, and be brave, for if you will do what I have
            told you, you may rest assured that we shall soon drive away the dangers that
            threaten you.</q></p>
      <p>Sherlock Holmes and I had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom and sitting-room at the
         Crown Inn. They were on the upper floor, and from our window we could command a view
         of
         the avenue gate, and of the inhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we
         saw
         <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">Dr. Grimesby Roylott drive past, his huge form looming up beside the little figure of
            the lad who drove him</span>. The boy had some slight difficulty in undoing the heavy iron
         gates, and we heard the hoarse roar of the Doctor's voice and saw the fury with which <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">he
            shook his clinched fists at him</span>. The trap drove on, and a few minutes later we saw a
         sudden light spring up among the trees as the lamp was lit in one of the
         sitting-rooms.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Do you know, Watson,</q> said Holmes as we sat together in the gathering
         darkness, <q class="sw-quote">I have really some scruples as to taking you to-night. There is a
            distinct element of danger.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Can I be of assistance?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Your presence might be invaluable.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Then I shall certainly come.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is very kind of you.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in these rooms than was visible
            to me.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more. I imagine that you saw all
            that I did.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purpose that could answer I
            confess is more than I can imagine.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You saw the ventilator, too?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to have a small
            opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat could hardly pass
            through.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came to Stoke
            Moran.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">My dear  Holmes !</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that her sister could smell
            Dr. Roylott's cigar. Now, of course that suggested at once that there must be a
            communication between the two rooms. It could only be a small one, or it would have
            been remarked upon at the coroner's inquiry. I deduced a ventilator.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">But what harm can there be in that?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A ventilator is made, a
            cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Does not that strike
            you?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I cannot as yet see any connection.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">No.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It was clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a bed fastened like that
            before?</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I cannot say that I have.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The lady could not move her bed. It must always be in the same relative position
            to the ventilator and to the rope—or so we may call it, since it was clearly never
            meant for a bell-pull.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Holmes,</q> I cried, <q class="sw-quote">I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at. We
            are only just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he is the first of
            criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge. Palmer and Pritchard were among the
            heads of their profession. This man strikes even deeper, but I think, Watson, that
            we shall be able to strike deeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before the
            night is over; for goodness' sake let us have a quiet pipe and turn our minds for
            a
            few hours to something more cheerful.</q></p>
      <p>About nine o'clock the light among the trees was extinguished, and all was dark in
         the
         direction of the Manor House. Two hours passed slowly away, and then, suddenly, just
         at
         the stroke of eleven, a single bright light shone out right in front of us.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">That is our signal,</q> said <span class="sw-action"> Holmes , springing to his feet</span>; <q class="sw-quote">it comes
            from the middle window.</q></p>
      <p>As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord, explaining that we were
         going on a late visit to an acquaintance, and that it was possible that we might spend
         the night there. A moment later we were out on the dark road, a chill wind blowing
         in
         our faces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of us through the gloom to guide
         us
         on our sombre errand.</p>
      <p>There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, for unrepaired breaches gaped
         in the
         old park wall. Making our way among the trees, we reached the lawn, crossed it, and
         were
         about to enter through the window when out from a clump of laurel bushes there darted
         what seemed to be a hideous and distorted child, who threw itself upon the grass with
         writhing limbs and then ran swiftly across the lawn into the darkness.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">My God!</q> I whispered; <q class="sw-quote">did you see it?</q></p>
      <p>Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like a vice upon my wrist in
         his agitation. Then <span class="sw-action">he broke into a low laugh and put his lips to my ear</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is a nice household,</q> he murmured. <q class="sw-quote">That is the
            baboon.</q></p>
      <p>I had forgotten the strange pets which the Doctor affected. There was a cheetah, too;
         perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at any moment. I confess that I felt easier
         in my mind when, after following  Holmes ' example and slipping off my shoes, I found
         myself inside the bedroom. My companion noiselessly closed the shutters, moved the
         lamp
         onto the table, and cast his eyes round the room. All was as we had seen it in the
         daytime. <span class="sw-action">Then creeping up to me and making a trumpet of his hand, he whispered into my
            ear again so gently</span> that it was all that I could do to distinguish the words:</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The least sound would be fatal to our plans.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I nodded to show that I had heard.</span></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">We must sit without light. He would see it through the ventilator.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I nodded again</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your pistol ready in
            case we should need it. I will sit on the side of the bed, and you in that
            chair.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table</span>.</p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon the bed beside him. By it
            he laid the box of matches and the stump of a candle. Then he turned down the lamp,
            and
            we were left in darkness.</span></p>
      <p>How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear a sound, not even the
         drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that my companion sat open-eyed, within a few
         feet
         of me, in the same state of nervous tension in which I was myself. The shutters cut
         off
         the least ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness.</p>
      <p>From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once at our very window
         a long
         drawn catlike whine, which told us that the cheetah was indeed at liberty. Far away
         we
         could hear the deep tones of the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of an
         hour. How long they seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck, and one and two and three,
         and still we sat waiting silently for whatever might befall.</p>
      <p>Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the direction of the ventilator,
         which vanished immediately, but was succeeded by a strong smell of burning oil and
         heated metal. Someone in the next room had lit a dark-lantern. <span class="sw-action">I heard a gentle sound of
            movement</span>, and then all was silent once more, though the smell grew stronger. For half an
         hour <span class="sw-action">I sat with straining ears</span>. Then suddenly another sound became audible—a very
         gentle, soothing sound, like that of a small jet of steam escaping continually from
         a
         kettle. The instant that we heard it,<span class="sw-action"> Holmes sprang from the bed, struck a match, and
            lashed furiously with his cane at the bell-pull</span>.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">You see it, Watson?</q> he yelled. <q class="sw-quote">You see it?</q></p>
      <p>But I saw nothing. At the moment when<span class="sw-action"> Holmes struck the light</span> <span class="sw-action">I heard a low, clear
            whistle</span>, but the sudden glare flashing into my weary eyes made it impossible for me to
         tell what it was at which my friend lashed so savagely. I could, however, see that
         his
         face was deadly pale and filled with horror and loathing. He had ceased to strike
         and
         was gazing up at the ventilator when suddenly there broke from the silence of the
         night
         the most horrible cry to which I have ever listened. It swelled up louder and louder,
         a
         hoarse yell of pain and fear and anger all mingled in the one dreadful shriek. They
         say
         that away down in the village, and even in the distant parsonage, that cry raised
         the
         sleepers from their beds. It struck cold to our hearts, and <span class="sw-action">I stood gazing at Holmes</span>,
         and he at me, until the last echoes of it had died away into the silence from which
         it
         rose.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">What can it mean?</q> I gasped.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It means that it is all over,</q> Holmes answered. <q class="sw-quote">And perhaps, after
            all, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will enter Dr. Roylott's
            room.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the corridor. Twice he struck at
            the chamber door without any reply from within. Then he turned the handle and entered</span>, <span class="sw-action">I
            at his heels, with the cocked pistol in my hand</span>.</p>
      <p>It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood a dark-lantern with
         the
         shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beam of light upon the iron safe, the door
         of
         which was ajar. Beside this table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in
         a long grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding beneath, and his feet thrust
         into
         red heelless Turkish slippers. Across his lap lay the short stock with the long lash
         which we had noticed during the day. <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">His chin was cocked upward and his eyes were fixed
            in a dreadful, rigid stare at the corner of the ceiling. Round his brow he had a
            peculiar yellow band, with brownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly round
            his
            head</span>. As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">The band! the speckled band!</q> whispered  Holmes .</p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">I took a step forward</span>. In an instant his strange headgear began to move, and there reared
         itself from among his hair the squat diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome
         serpent.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">It is a swamp adder!</q> cried  Holmes ; <q class="sw-quote">the deadliest snake in India. He
            has died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in truth, recoil upon
            the violent, and the schemer falls into the pit which he digs for another. Let us
            thrust this creature back into its den, and we can then remove Miss Stoner to some
            place of shelter and let the county police know what has happened.</q></p>
      <p><span class="sw-action">As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man's lap, and throwing the noose
            round the reptile's neck he drew it from its horrid perch and, carrying it at arm's
            length, threw it into the iron safe, which he closed upon it.</span></p>
      <p>Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran. It is not
         necessary that I should prolong a narrative which has already run to too great a length
         by telling how we broke the sad news to the terrified girl, how we conveyed her by
         the
         morning train to the care of her good aunt at Harrow, of how the slow process of
         official inquiry came to the conclusion that the doctor met his fate while indiscreetly
         playing with a dangerous pet. The little which I had yet to learn of the case was
         told
         me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelled back next day.</p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I had,</q> said he, <q class="sw-quote">come to an entirely erroneous conclusion which
            shows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason from insufficient data.
            The presence of the gipsies, and the use of the word 'band,' which was used by the
            poor girl, no doubt, to explain the appearance which she had caught a hurried
            glimpse of by the light of her match, were sufficient to put me upon an entirely
            wrong scent. I can only claim the merit that I instantly reconsidered my position
            when, however, it became clear to me that whatever danger threatened an occupant of
            the room could not come either from the window or the door. My attention was
            speedily drawn, as I have already remarked to you, to this ventilator, and to the
            bell-rope which hung down to the bed. The discovery that this was a dummy, and that
            the bed was clamped to the floor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that the rope
            was there as a bridge for something passing through the hole and coming to the bed.
            The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me, and when I coupled it with my
            knowledge that the doctor was furnished with a supply of creatures from India, I
            felt that I was probably on the right track. The idea of using a form of poison
            which could not possibly be discovered by any chemical test was just such a one as
            would occur to a clever and ruthless man who had had an Eastern training. The
            rapidity with which such a poison would take effect would also, from his point of
            view, be an advantage. It would be a sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, who could
            distinguish the two little dark punctures which would show where the poison fangs
            had done their work. Then I thought of the whistle. Of course he must recall the
            snake before the morning light revealed it to the victim. He had trained it,
            probably by the use of the milk which we saw, to return to him when summoned. He
            would put it through this ventilator at the hour that he thought best, with the
            certainty that it would crawl down the rope and land on the bed. It might or might
            not bite the occupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, but sooner
            or later she must fall a victim.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his room. An inspection
            of his chair showed me that he had been in the habit of standing on it, which of
            course would be necessary in order that he should reach the ventilator. The sight
            of
            the safe, the saucer of milk, and the loop of whipcord were enough to finally dispel
            any doubts which may have remained. The metallic clang heard by Miss Stoner was
            obviously caused by <span class="male" title="grimesbyRoylott">her stepfather hastily closing the door of his safe upon its
               terrible occupant.</span> Having once made up my mind, you know the steps which I took in
            order to put the matter to the proof. I heard the creature hiss as I have no doubt
            that you did also, and <span class="sw-action">I instantly lit the light and attacked it</span>.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">With the result of driving it through the ventilator.</q></p>
      <p><q class="sw-quote">And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its master at the other side.
            Some of the blows of my cane came home and roused its snakish temper, so that it
            flew upon the first person it saw. In this way I am no doubt indirectly responsible
            for Dr. Grimesby Roylott's death, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh very
            heavily upon my conscience.</q></p>
   </body>
</html>